Autonomous Uncertainty Quantification for 
Computational Point-of-care Sensors 

Artem Goncharov1, Rajesh Ghosh2, Hyou-Arm Joung1, Dino Di Carlo2,3 and Aydogan Ozcan1,2,3,4* 

1Electrical & Computer Engineering Department, 2Bioengineering Department, 3California NanoSystems Institute (CNSI), 4Department of 
Surgery, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA *Corresponding Author: ozcan@ucla.edu  

Abstract  

Computational point-of-care (POC) sensors enable rapid, low-cost, and accessible diagnostics in 
emergency, remote and resource-limited areas that lack access to centralized medical facilities. These 
systems can utilize neural network-based algorithms to accurately infer a diagnosis from the signals 
generated by rapid diagnostic tests or sensors. However, neural network-based diagnostic models are 
subject to hallucinations and can produce erroneous predictions, posing a risk of misdiagnosis and 
inaccurate clinical decisions. To address this challenge, here we present an autonomous uncertainty 
quantification technique developed for POC diagnostics. As our testbed, we used a paper-based, 
computational vertical flow assay (xVFA) platform developed for rapid POC diagnosis of Lyme disease, 
the most prevalent tick-borne disease globally. The xVFA platform integrates a disposable paper-based 
assay, a hand-held optical reader and a neural network-based inference algorithm, providing rapid and 
cost-effective Lyme disease diagnostics in under 20 min using only 20 µL of patient serum. By 
incorporating a Monte Carlo dropout (MCDO)-based uncertainty quantification approach into the 
diagnostics pipeline, we identified and excluded erroneous predictions with high uncertainty, significantly 
improving sensitivity and reliability of the xVFA in an autonomous manner, without access to the ground 
truth diagnostic information of patients. Blinded testing using new patient samples demonstrated an 
increase in diagnostic sensitivity from 88.2% to 95.7%, indicating the effectiveness of MCDO-based 
uncertainty quantification in enhancing the robustness of neural network–driven computational POC 
sensing systems.  

Key words 

Computational point-of-care sensors, vertical flow assays, Lyme disease, uncertainty quantification, 
Monte Carlo dropout, neural networks 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 

Point-of-care (POC) sensors represent an emerging class of diagnostic devices designed to enable rapid 
and inexpensive patient testing in emergency, underserved and remote settings that lack access to 
specialized equipment and highly trained medical personnel1-3. A common example of a POC sensor is a 
paper-based lateral flow assay (LFA)4-6 – a disposal rapid diagnostic test that typically provides diagnostic 
results in <20 min using a single droplet of patient sample, such as whole blood7, serum8,9, saliva10, or 
urine11. Conventional LFAs are primarily designed for single-analyte testing and can be interpreted 
visually by minimally trained or untrained users through the inspection of test and control lines within the 
active sensing region. In contrast, more advanced paper-based POC sensing systems have also emerged to 
support multiplexed testing12,13, enabling the parallel detection of multiple biomarkers14 or 
characterization of complex immune responses15-17. Such assays generate high-dimensional non-linear 
signals that are not readily interpretable by human users and therefore require integration with specialized 
readers and computational algorithms to process sensor outputs and infer diagnostic outcomes3. These 
computational POC sensors are particularly beneficial in scenarios that require clinician oversight, since 
test results generated at the POC can be remotely shared with physicians, who can then provide diagnostic 
interpretation and follow up clinical consultation.  

Computational POC sensing platforms frequently employ advanced machine learning algorithms, such as 
neural networks, to accurately learn complex functional relationships between multiplexed sensor signals 
and underlying diagnostic states14,15,18-21. Despite their powerful function approximation capabilities, 
neural networks used in computational POC sensors are susceptible to hallucinations or unreliable 
predictions, which may result in erroneous diagnostic outcomes and compromise the reliability of 
computational biomedical sensing systems, potentially limiting their acceptance in clinical practice3,22. In 
addition, the “black-box” nature of neural networks reduces transparency of these algorithms, making it 
difficult to interpret the underlying decision-making process and potentially lowering trust among patients 
and clinicians23,24. To address these challenges, uncertainty quantification25,26 techniques have been 
developed to estimate prediction uncertainty and improve the reliability of neural network-based 
diagnostics decision-making. In the context of computational POC sensing, uncertainty quantification can 
be applied to autonomously evaluate the confidence of individual diagnostic predictions and perform 
reliability testing that determines whether a given test outcome should be trusted or not – all without 
access to ground-truth patient information. As a result, each diagnostic outcome can be supplemented by a 
specific reliability action: “Trust” or “Do not use” (Figure 1). A “Trust” action indicates that the sensor 
has successfully passed the autonomous reliability assessment and the corresponding neural network 
prediction is considered trustworthy, whereas a “Do not use” action signifies that the prediction failed the 
reliability check and should be excluded from decision-making. Samples that fail this quality assurance 
check can undergo a follow up testing. 

Two primary sources contribute to the uncertainty associated with neural network predictions: the first 
(epistemic uncertainty) arises from, e.g., limited or insufficient training data and/or model 
imperfections/bias, while the second (aleatoric uncertainty) originates from intrinsic noise and stochastic 
variability present within the measured data27. Both forms of uncertainty are inherently present in 
computational sensing systems: epistemic uncertainty, owing to the relatively small clinical datasets used 
to train computational POC sensors28,29 and interpatient variability in immune responses that leads to 
different disease specific antibody titers; and aleatoric uncertainty, resulting from multiple sources of 
measurement noise and variations encountered in these systems (due to e.g., inexpensive paper materials, 
manual sensor operation, environmental factors, and sample matrix effects, etc.)3,13,30. Consequently, an 
effective uncertainty quantification strategy for computational POC sensing platforms should 

2 

 
autonomously account for both epistemic and aleatoric uncertainties to ensure reliable diagnostic 
inference. 

Monte Carlo dropout (MCDO) is a widely used Bayesian uncertainty quantification approach that applies 
stochastic dropout to the weights of a trained baseline neural network during the blind inference phase31, 
addressing both epistemic and aleatoric uncertainties32. In MCDO, multiple forward passes with randomly 
sampled dropout masks are applied to each test sample during the blind testing stage, producing a 
distribution of predictions that can be compared against the baseline model output to quantify predictive 
uncertainty. Based on this uncertainty estimation, a reliability action – “Trust” or “Do not use” – can be 
assigned to the baseline prediction in an autonomous manner, without access to the ground truth 
information (Figure 2). The MCDO method has been successfully applied to quantify uncertainty and 
improve predictive performance in various computational diagnostic systems, including quantitative 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)33, computed tomography (CT)34, and optical coherence tomography 
(OCT)35. However, while MCDO demonstrated effectiveness in imaging-based systems, its applications 
to computational POC sensing platforms remain unexplored.  

Here, we demonstrate MCDO-based uncertainty quantification for diagnostic quality assurance of 
computational POC sensing systems. As a testbed, we utilize a paper-based multiplexed vertical flow 
assay (xVFA) for the rapid and cost-effective diagnosis of Lyme disease (LD) 36,37, the most common tick-
borne disease globally38. LD is a bacterial infection caused by Borrelia burgdorferi bacterium that is 
transmitted to humans through the bite of infected ticks (Ixodes scapularis)39. The current gold-standard 
laboratory diagnostics recommended by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) rely 
on a tedious and costly two-tier testing procedure consisting of a first-tier enzyme immunoassay (EIA) 
followed by a second-tier western blot (WB) or a second EIA40. This multi-step testing strategy suffers 
from limited sensitivity during early-stage LD, when antibiotic treatment is most effective at preventing 
bacteria dissemination across the human body41. In addition, two-tier testing requires centralized 
laboratory infrastructure, leading to prolonged turnaround times and reduced accessibility to timely 
diagnostics, particularly in remote and rural areas where the LD prevalence is higher. To address these 
challenges of the two-tier testing process, a single-tier POC diagnostics platform for LD was developed 
based on the paper-based xVFA technology, enabling rapid and accessible LD diagnostics in POC 
settings15,19,42. This paper-based, cost-effective xVFA platform detects LD in under 20 min using a 20 µL 
droplet of patient serum. The assay incorporates a 2D sensing membrane functionalized with a curated 
panel of LD-specific peptides,19,43-45 which selectively bind to human antibodies developed in response to 
the infection, enabling sensitive and specific serological detection. Following assay operation, an image 
of the activated sensing membrane is captured using a hand-held smartphone-based optical reader and 
processed by a neural network-based inference algorithm, in which a pre-trained network model analyzes 
multiplexed assay signals to infer LD diagnostic outcomes15,19 (Figure 3a). To provide an autonomous 
quality assurance for the xVFA-based LD POC diagnostic platform, we developed an MCDO-based 
uncertainty quantification framework integrated into the diagnostic pipeline. In addition to processing 
each xVFA sample with the baseline diagnostic neural network, we performed inference using N = 50-
1000 MCDO models, generating a distribution of prediction scores for each patient serum sample. By 
comparing the baseline prediction scores with the corresponding distribution of MCDO model scores, we 
introduced an uncertainty figure of merit (FOM) that autonomously quantifies diagnostic prediction 
uncertainty and excludes test samples with high uncertainty values from the decision-making process. 
Applying the MCDO-based uncertainty quantification pipeline to blinded patient samples improved LD 
diagnostic sensitivity from 88.2% to 95.7% , demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed uncertainty 
quantification approach in enhancing the reliability of computational POC sensing systems. To the best of 

3 

 
our knowledge, this study represents the first application of an MCDO-based uncertainty quantification 
technique to a computational POC sensing platform. 

Results and Discussion 

xVFA platform for Lyme disease diagnostics 

The xVFA platform integrates a paper-based sensor, a hand-held optical reader, and a deep learning-based 
LD diagnostics algorithm, providing single-tier testing of LD in less than 20 min using a single droplet of 
patient serum. This cost-effective assay utilizes a vertical flow architecture that supports a 2D array of 
immunoreaction spots, enabling the incorporation of tens of individual reaction spots (channels) across 
the sensing membrane. These spots are functionalized with synthetic peptides containing B. burgdorferi-
specific epitopes that efficiently bind human IgM and IgG antibodies developed in response to Lyme 
infection. In total, the LD sensing membrane contains 25 spots precoated with 9 distinct peptides in 
duplicate (i.e., 18 in total), along with 3 positive control spots (goat anti-mouse IgG) and 4 negative 
control spots (buffer). The assay operation takes ~16 min and incorporates two sequential steps: a sample 
loading step where human anti-borrelia IgM and IgG antibodies bind to the peptide-functionalized spots, 
and a signal generation step where gold nanoparticle (AuNP) conjugates react with human 
immunoglobulins, producing colorimetric optical signals (see the “Operation of xVFA for Lyme disease” 
section in the Methods). Following assay completion, an image of the activated sensing membrane is 
captured using the optical reader and colorimetric intensities from the immunoreaction spots are extracted 
from the image by a custom segmentation code executed on a computer. Finally, these extracted signals 
are processed by a neural network model to infer the LD diagnostic outcome for each patient (Figure 3a); 
see the Methods for details. The use of multiplexing in the xVFA design and the selected peptide panel is 
crucial for LD diagnostics since combining peptides that target multiple B. burgdorferi-specific epitopes 
reduces cross-reactivity with other bacterial infections while maintaining high diagnostic sensitivity for 
LD19.  

Before developing the autonomous uncertainty quantification framework to improve the reliability of 
neural network-based LD diagnostic inference, we first focused on selecting an appropriate baseline POC 
network model. Among various performance metrics for POC sensing systems, diagnostic sensitivity is 
often considered the most critical from the patient’s health standpoint. False negative predictions, which 
lower the sensitivity of a test, leave infected individuals undetected and untreated, potentially leading to 
disease progression and associated complications, unless follow-up testing yields a true positive result. In 
the context of LD, the detection of earlier-stage infections is particularly beneficial due to the 
effectiveness of antibiotic-based treatments at these earlier time periods, whereas undiagnosed infections 
can progress to long-term health complications, including neurological, cardiac, or rheumatoid 
manifestations46. The negative implications of an increased false positive rate (which lowers specificity) 
for a POC test are less of a concern since additional testing beyond the initial POC screening would often 
be performed, which can mitigate false positive decisions. Therefore, to explicitly demonstrate the impact 
of uncertainty quantification on diagnostic performance, we intentionally focused on improving the 
sensitivity of the LD POC test in an autonomous manner, without access to ground-truth patient 
information. Accordingly, we selected a baseline neural network model, termed Lyme model (L0), that 
utilized all the xVFA spots (including nine peptides) as input features to the network architecture; see 
Figure 3. The L0 prediction scores range from 0 to 1, reflecting the output of the sigmoid activation 
function applied at the output layer of the LD diagnostic network; see the Methods section. The final 
diagnostic classification is performed by comparing the L0 score to a score threshold of 0.5: samples with 

4 

 
scores below 0.5 are classified as Lyme-negative, while samples with scores equal to or above 0.5 are 
classified as Lyme-positive.  

The architecture of L0 was selected based on its performance on a validation test set consisting of 93 
activated xVFA cartridges from 31 patient serum samples obtained from the Lyme Disease Biobank 
(LDB). This selected model (L0) demonstrated a specificity of 97.4% and a relatively low sensitivity of 
81.5% on the validation dataset, as shown in Figure 4c (see “Baseline Lyme model architecture and 
training” section in Methods for more details on the architecture and training of L0). The same model (L0) 
was subsequently evaluated on an independent blind testing dataset consisting of 87 xVFA samples from 
29 different patients collected from the same biobank, demonstrating a specificity of 100% and a 
sensitivity of 88.2% (see Figure 5c). 

Monte Carlo dropout (MCDO)-based autonomous uncertainty quantification for POC LD 
testing  

After optimizing the POC LD diagnostic model, L0, next we developed an MCDO-based uncertainty 
quantification framework to improve sensitivity and overall reliability of the baseline LD diagnostic 
model in an autonomous manner, without access to patient ground truth information. In this pipeline, each 
xVFA sample under test is processed by N = 1000 MCDO Lyme models (Ln, n = 1…N), where each 
model applies a different random dropout mask with a 10% dropout rate to L0 during the blind inference 
phase. Figures 4a and 5a show histograms of the prediction scores generated by these Ln models (blue) 
overlaid with the corresponding L0 outputs (green and pink) for the validation and blind testing datasets, 
respectively, with samples ordered from top to bottom by increasing L0 scores (see “Generation of Monte 
Carlo dropout model histograms” section in Methods for more details). Similar to L0 outputs, prediction 
scores generated by Ln models also span the [0 : 1] range.  

The distributions of Lₙ scores are compared against the corresponding L0 predictions on the validation 
dataset to define a quantitative uncertainty metric. By analyzing the absolute difference between the L0 
and the average Ln prediction scores, we observed that the gap between these two sets of scores increases 
as the L0 output approaches the decision threshold of 0.5. At the same time, the majority of false negative 
predictions in the validation dataset had L0 scores clustered around the same threshold. Therefore, to 
quantitatively capture prediction uncertainty and potentially improve the predictive performance of the L0 
diagnostic model, we introduced a decision uncertainty figure of merit (F) as follows: 

F = 

1
|𝐵0 − <𝑀𝐶>|

, 

where B0 is the L0 prediction score (i.e., B0 = L0(x)) and <MC> is the average score of Ln models defined 
as: 

<MC> = 

1

N

∑

N
n=1

Ln

(𝐱), 

Ln(𝐱) are the prediction scores of individual MCDO Lyme models (n = 1,…,N), and x is the array of 
xVFA input signals fed into the models. 

Based on this definition, a low F value for a given patient sample indicates high predictive uncertainty, as 
the prediction score from L0 and the average score generated by Ln models significantly diverge. 
Accordingly, we introduced an uncertainty figure of merit threshold (Fth) as a cutoff to autonomously 
identify and exclude patient samples with low F values that are deemed unreliable due to elevated 
prediction uncertainty. Within this framework, uncertainty quantification for an xVFA sample is 
performed by computing its F value and comparing it to Fth. Each sample is then assigned one of the two 

5 

 
reliability actions: “Trust” or “Do not use”. Samples with F values greater than or equal to Fth are 
classified as reliable (“Trust”), and the corresponding Lyme diagnostic predictions from L0 are acceptable 
for clinical interpretation. In contrast, samples with F values less than Fth are labeled as unreliable (“Do 
not use”), and the associated L0 predictions are excluded from decision-making (Figure 3b,c). 

The uncertainty threshold Fth was optimized on the validation dataset by selecting a single cutoff value 
that removed a substantial fraction of false predictions at the expense of missing a minimal number of 
correctly classified samples. By using Fth = 8.5 and excluding samples with lower F values, we filtered 
out 7 of the 11 misclassified samples in the validation dataset at the expense of only 3 correctly classified 
true negative predictions (see Figure 4b and Figure S1a). This reliability testing step filtered out 6 false 
negatives and 1 false positive predictions, improving the validation test sensitivity of L0 from 81.5% to 
89.8% and increasing the overall validation accuracy from 88.2% to 94.0% (Figure 4c). The L0 prediction 
scores for the excluded samples span a broad range between 0.24 and 0.59, indicating substantial 
variability in the baseline model output scores, and this variability limits the ability to assess model 
reliability from the prediction scores alone. In contrast, MCDO-based uncertainty quantification 
framework provides a quantitative metric (F) that efficiently filters out a significant portion of false 
predictions, irrespective of their baseline scores.  

After developing the MCDO-based uncertainty quantification framework and optimizing Fth on the 
validation dataset, we applied this pipeline to an independent blind testing cohort to evaluate its 
performance on previously unseen patient samples. Applying the Fth = 8.5 cutoff to the blind testing 
samples excluded 4 of the 6 false negative predictions, resulting in an increase in the blind testing 
sensitivity from 88.2% to 95.7% and an improvement in overall LD test accuracy from 94.2% to 97.4% 
(see Figure 5b,c and Figure S1b). These performance gains were achieved at the expense of excluding a 
small fraction of the correctly classified samples, specifically 1 true positive and 4 true negative 
predictions. In practice, all samples excluded during the reliability testing step can be directed for follow 
up testing to ensure reliable diagnostic outcomes for all patients. Although this process increases the 
sample-to-answer time for these cases, the quality assurance step helps minimize false negative diagnostic 
outputs, which could otherwise lead to severe long-term health complications due to undetected LD46. 

All the N = 1000 MCDO Lyme models used in the uncertainty quantification pipeline reported so far 
utilized a 10% dropout; however, additional dropout rates were evaluated for comparative analysis. For 
each dropout rate, the uncertainty threshold Fth was independently optimized using the validation dataset. 
For dropout rates in the 1-50% range, we observed only minor variations in the optimal Fth values as well 
as in the overall performance of the uncertainty quantification pipeline on the blind testing dataset (see 
Figures S2-S3). In contrast, larger dropout rates (≥50%) resulted in more significant variability, 
characterized by a broader distribution of F values for false negative samples and increased exclusion of 
true negative predictions (Figure S3b). This effect was particularly apparent at a 75% dropout rate, where 
a cutoff value of Fth = 8.7 excluded 11 true negative samples in addition to the 4 false negative 
predictions. Furthermore, a dropout rate of 90% caused a substantial shift of F values towards lower 
ranges for both true negative and false negative predictions. To partially address this behavior for larger 
High, and excluded samples with F 
Low and Fth
dropout rates, we introduced two uncertainty thresholds, Fth
High, see Figure S2c,f). Nevertheless, due to a 
Low≤ F ≤ Fth
values falling between these boundaries (i.e., Fth
significant mismatch in the F value distributions between the validation and blind testing datasets and the 
scattered distribution of F values for misclassified samples, the uncertainty quantification pipeline with a 
90% dropout rate exhibited an inferior performance (see Figure S3a). Overall, these results indicate that 
lower dropout rates (≤20%) are preferable for MCDO-based uncertainty quantification in computational 

6 

 
POC sensing systems, as excessively large dropout percentages induce unstable discrepancies between 
the performances of L0 and Ln.  

Although we used N = 1000 Ln models to generate a well-sampled distribution of prediction scores, we 
found that substantially smaller numbers of Ln models can also achieve comparable performance on the 
blind testing dataset with a reduced computational cost. For example, using N = 50 Ln models with the 
same uncertainty threshold (Fth = 8.5) filtered out 5 false negative predictions in the validation set, and 4 
false negative samples in the blind testing set, resulting in the same level of performance improvement in 
the blind testing sensitivity, achieving 95.7% (Figure S4). Generating N = 1000 MCDO predictions for 87 
blind testing samples required 11.5 s of computation time, whereas the same process for N = 50 only took 
0.66 s, reducing inference time by over an order of magnitude (Figure S5a). Nevertheless, both inference 
times are negligible compared to the total xVFA operation time (~16 min). In addition, the xVFA platform 
is primarily targeting decentralized and personalized LD testing, where testing batch sizes are typically 
small (on the order of 1-10 samples per run), further reducing inference times (i.e., to <10 s for N = 1000 
and <0.6 s for N=50, Figure S5b,c). Therefore, a primary motivation for using a lower N in POC settings 
is not computational speed but rather practical considerations related to data storage and system 
constraints. In settings with limited data storage capacity, such as remote clinics lacking connectivity to 
centralized data centers or cloud computing services, data might be stored locally on benchtop computers 
or directly on the optical reader hardware, and lower N values may be beneficial to minimize data storage 
requirements and simplify data management. 

To enhance the generalization capabilities of the uncertainty quantification framework, future efforts 
should expand the original training dataset to ideally include patient samples from multiple biobanks, 
various collection time periods, and diverse geographical regions. Such an expansion would enable the 
generation of a unified uncertainty threshold (or a set of thresholds) capable of supporting reliable and 
autonomous uncertainty quantification across diverse patient cohorts. As the xVFA platform and its 
associated neural network models are extended to a broader set of applications and target populations, the 
uncertainty quantification pipeline should be accordingly calibrated to ensure robust performance across 
all sample groups and diagnostic applications.  

The MCDO-based uncertainty quantification framework demonstrated in this work requires access to the 
baseline Lyme model, L0, to generate uncertainty estimates by using the dropout strategy. Consequently, 
implementation of MCDO-based reliability testing should be integrated into the diagnostic pipeline by the 
POC sensor developers/providers during the development stage, with a predetermined value of N. As the 
xVFA sensor and its associated neural network models evolve, the uncertainty quantification algorithm 
would need to be continuously updated and revalidated to ensure reliable performance across successive 
generations of POC sensors. As an alternative to this approach, model-free uncertainty quantification 
methods that enable reliability testing without direct access to the underlying diagnostic model are also 
important to consider, as they can facilitate the broader adoption of uncertainty quantification techniques 
by both sensor developers and end-users. Such model-free uncertainty quantification approaches would 
offer appealing alternatives to model-based methods, including the MCDO-based approach presented in 
this work, especially in scenarios where access to the baseline diagnostic models is limited or proprietary. 

Conclusions  

In this work, we demonstrated an uncertainty quantification method based on Monte Carlo dropout to 
quantify diagnostic uncertainty and improve the performance of neural network-based computational 
POC sensing systems. As a proof-of-principle demonstration, we applied this approach to a multiplexed 
vertical flow assay (xVFA) platform for Lyme disease diagnostics, achieving an improvement in blind 

7 

 
testing sensitivity up to 95.7%. To the best of our knowledge, this work represents the first application of 
MCDO-based uncertainty quantification techniques to a computational POC sensing platform. Providing 
an explicit uncertainty measure alongside diagnostic predictions is critical for improving trust and 
acceptance of computational POC sensors in clinical settings. Nevertheless, substantial work remains to 
be done before such systems can be routinely deployed in clinical practice and patient care. A key 
milestone in this transition is obtaining approvals from regulatory agencies, including the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA), which is actively refining its regulatory framework to better accommodate 
machine learning–enabled medical devices47. In this context, uncertainty quantification and digital quality 
assurance techniques are expected to play an important role in these regulatory discussions since a robust 
and transparent uncertainty estimation framework can help improve model reliability, risk mitigation, and 
clinical safety, facilitating the regulatory review and approval processes. For example, samples that fail 
quality assurance step may undergo repeated testing to obtain a reliable diagnostic prediction, and in cases 
of repeated failure, when at least two consecutive test results are unreliable, the patient can be referred for 
a gold-standard laboratory-based diagnostics assay, such as a two-tier test for Lyme disease. This testing 
pipeline could ensure that patients receive trustworthy diagnostic results, while mitigating the risks 
associated with potential neural network model hallucinations. Overall, as computational POC sensing 
platforms continue to mature, close collaboration among sensor developers, regulatory bodies, and 
medical professionals will be crucial to facilitate the seamless integration of these devices into clinical 
workflows.  

Methods  

Operation of xVFA for Lyme disease 

Prior to assay operation, all paper layers were prepared using a laser-cutter (Trotec) and a wax printer 
(Xerox) and stacked vertically within the top and bottom cases of the xVFA cartridge. Before initiating 
the assay, an image of the unused sensing membrane was captured using the optical reader to record the 
background signal. Then, the top and bottom cases were assembled using a twisting mechanism, and the 
assay was operated in two sequential stages. The first stage (sample loading), consisted of three steps: (i) 
loading 200 µL of running buffer to activate the assay, (ii) injection of a 20 µL serum sample, during 
which B. burgdorferi-specific antibodies bind to peptide-functionalized immunoreaction spots, and (iii) 
loading 200 µL of washing buffer to remove unbound antibodies and proteins from the sensing 
membrane. After an 8 min washing period, the first top case was removed and replaced with a second top 
case to initiate the signal generation stage. In this second stage, running buffer (200 µL), 40 nm AuNPs-
detector antibody conjugates (a mixture of mouse anti-human IgM and IgG in a 1:1 ratio, 50 µL), and 
washing buffer (200 µL) were sequentially loaded, enabling visualization of anti-Borrelia antibodies 
through specific binding between human immunoglobulins and AuNP-conjugated detector antibodies. 
This step took an additional 8 min to complete, after which the second top case was opened, and an image 
of the activated sensing membrane was captured using the hand-held optical reader. 

Hand-held optical reader and image pre-processing 

The optical reader used for xVFA readout consisted of a smartphone (LG G7 ThinQ) integrated with a 
custom 3D-printed optical attachment fabricated using Object 30 (Stratasys) and Ultimaker 3 (Ultimaker) 
3D printers. This attachment was designed to securely hold the smartphone, an external optical module 
and xVFA cartridges to ensure stable and reproducible assay imaging. The optical module incorporated 4 
green LEDs arranged in a circular pattern to provide uniform illumination of the sensing membrane, and 
an external lens to enable optimal focusing of the smartphone camera onto the sensing membrane plane. 
The LED peak emission wavelength (532 nm) was selected to match the peak absorption range of the 

8 

 
AuNPs labels (520-560 nm) used for colorimetric signal generation. The LEDs were polished from the 
front to further improve illumination uniformity across the sensing membrane area. The 3D-printed 
attachment was also equipped with optical posts for pedestal installation, enabling both hand-held and 
benchtop operation. The xVFA sensing membrane imaging was performed using the standard LG 
smartphone camera application operated in manual mode, with imaging parameters set to ISO 50, an 
exposure time of 0.625 ms, and autofocus enabled.  

For each assay, the optical reader captured images of the sensing membrane twice: before and after the 
assay was activated. Captured images were processed using a custom segmentation code on a computer to 
extract per-spot colorimetric signals by averaging pixel intensities within circular masks overlayed with 
the spots. Final absorption (colorimetric) signals from the 25 immunoreaction spots were calculated 
according to: 

𝑗
𝑥𝑖

 = 1 – 

𝑗
𝑠𝑖
𝑗, 
𝑏𝑖

𝑗 and 𝑠𝑖

𝑗 are the segmented per-spot signals before and after the xVFA activation, respectively, the 

where 𝑏𝑖
index i refers to the type of immunoreaction condition (9 peptide conditions, positive control, and 
negative control), and the index j refers to the spot repeat within the given condition. These absorption 
signals (x) were used as inputs to the Lyme diagnostic models.  

Baseline Lyme model architecture and training 

The baseline Lyme diagnostic model (L0) represents a shallow fully-connected binary classification neural 
network. The model used all 25 absorption signals (x) extracted from the xVFA sensing membrane as 
input features. The network architecture was selected through a hyperparameter grid search using the 
validation dataset of clinical samples. The selected LD diagnostic model included two hidden layers (256 
and 64 units), each with ReLU activation functions and L2 regularization (λ = 0.01). Each hidden layer 
was followed by a batch normalization layer and a dropout layer with a dropout rate of 50% (which was 
only used during model training).  The output layer contained 1 unit with a sigmoid activation function to 
generate a prediction score in the [0 : 1] range. The model was trained using a binary cross-entropy loss 
function, compiled with the Adam optimizer, a learning rate of 1e-2, and a batch size of 8. The binary 
cross-entropy loss is defined as: 

𝐿𝐵𝐶𝐸   =   −

1
𝑁𝑏

∑ (𝑦𝑖 log(𝑦′

𝑁𝑏
𝑖=1

𝑖) + (1 − 𝑦𝑖) log(1 − 𝑦′

, 
𝑖))

where 𝑁𝑏 is the batch size, 𝑦𝑖 are the ground truth labels (“0” for LD negative and “1” for LD positive), 
and 𝑦′

𝑖 ϵ [0 : 1]) generated by the sigmoid activation function: 

𝑖 are the prediction scores (𝑦′

′ =  

𝑦𝑖

1
1 +   𝑒−𝑦̂𝑖

where 𝑦̂𝑖 is the model’s inference before the sigmoid function. The final diagnostics prediction per sample 
was determined by comparing the 𝑦′
𝑖 score with the decision threshold of 0.5. Diagnostics predictions for 
samples with  𝑦′
𝑖 ≥ 
0.5 were assigned to Lyme-positive. 

𝑖 < 0.5 were assigned to Lyme-negative, while the predictions for the samples with 𝑦′

The L0 model was trained and validated on 93 xVFA samples activated with 31 unique patient serum 
samples. We utilized the same datasets for both training and validation due to the limited size of the 
training dataset. Employing conventional cross-validation approaches may lead to model overfitting on 

9 

 
 
small validation subsets, leading to unreliable model performance on unseen data. Prior to the application 
of MCDO-based uncertainty quantification, L0 achieved a sensitivity of 81.5% and a specificity of 97.4% 
on the validation dataset (Figure 4c). The L0 model was further blindly tested on 87 xVFA samples from 
29 different patients (never seen before), achieving a sensitivity of 88.2% and a specificity of 100%, as 
reported in the “Results and Discussion” section (Figure 5c). All the samples used for training, validation 
and blind testing were patient serum samples collected by the Lyme Disease Biobank (LDB).  

To implement MCDO-based uncertainty quantification framework, each xVFA sample was first processed 
by the L0 model without applying a dropout during the blind inference stage. At this step, the effective 
dropout rate was 0%, since the 50% dropout layers specified in the L0 architecture were only active 
′). Subsequently, each sample was 
during model training. This step generated the baseline score (𝑦𝑖
processed by N = 50-1000 MCDO Lyme models that shared the same architecture as L0, but had random 
dropout masks applied at a 10% dropout rate during the blind inference stage, generating a distribution of 
MCDO scores (Ln(𝐱), n = 1, … , N). The average MCDO score and the corresponding uncertainty figure 
of merit (F) were then computed according to the equations defined in the “Results and Discussion” 
section. 

All neural network models were trained and evaluated on a desktop computer equipped with a GeForce 
GTX 1080 Ti graphics processing unit (NVIDIA). The MCDO-based uncertainty quantification pipeline 
was developed in Python using NumPy, TensorFlow, and Keras libraries. Training time for L0 was ~20 s, 
while the blind testing of the trained L0 model was substantially faster, taking less than 0.3 s to process all 
87 blind testing samples. Blind testing using N = 1000 MCDO Lyme models required 11.5 s, which was 
reduced to 0.66 s when using N = 50 MCDO Lyme models (Figure S5b,c). 

Generation of Monte Carlo dropout model histograms 

Figures 4a and 5a contain histograms of Ln scores for the validation and blind testing datasets, 
respectively. To generate these histograms, each xVFA sample was first processed by N=1000 Ln models, 
each producing a prediction score in the [0 : 1] range based on the sigmoid activation function at the 
network output layer. Next, these scores were discretized into 50 bins, each with a width of 0.02, 
generating a 1D histogram for every sample. In this representation, the value of each bin represents Ln 
models density calculated as: 

ρ𝑗 =

1
N

N

∑ 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡(
n=1

𝐿𝑛(𝐱)
𝑤

− 𝑗 −

1
2

)

∗ 100%, 

where 𝑗 = 0…49 is the bin number and 𝑤 = 0.02 is the bin width. Based on this definition, ρ𝑗 takes values 
between 0% and 100%; ρ𝑗 = 0% if no Ln models for this sample have output scores within bin j and ρ𝑗 = 
100% if all N=1000 Ln models for a given sample have scores within bin j. 

Each 1D histogram was further overlaid with the corresponding L0 score classified into one of the 50 bins. 
For each patient sample, the L0 score (𝐵0) was assigned to a bin number ⌊𝐵0/𝑤⌋, and the corresponding 
bin was marked with a green (for Lyme negative predictions) or a pink (for Lyme positive predictions) 
circle. The resulting sample-wise 1D histograms were then stacked row-wise to form a 2D histogram, in 
which each row represented an individual test sample and each column corresponded to a different 
classification bin, covering the Ln score distribution in the [0 : 1] range. Samples in this 2D histogram 
were sorted from top to bottom according to increasing L0 scores.  

10 

 
 
Supporting Information:  

Supplementary Figures S1-S5. 

References 

[1] Kaushik, A. & Mujawar, M. A. Point of care sensing devices: better care for everyone. Sensors 18, 
4303 (2018); 
[2] Zhang, W., Wang, R., Luo, F., Wang, P. & Lin, Z. Miniaturized electrochemical sensors and their 
point-of-care applications. Chin. Chem. Lett. 31, 589-600 (2020); 
[3] Han, G. R., Goncharov, A., Eryilmaz, M., Ye, S., Palanisamy, B., et al. Machine learning in point-of-
care testing: Innovations, challenges, and opportunities. Nat. Commun. 16, 3165 (2025); 
[4] Budd, J., Miller, B. S., Weckman, N. E., Cherkaoui, D., Huang, D., et al. Lateral flow test engineering 
and lessons learned from COVID-19. Nat. Rev. Bioeng. 1, 13-31 (2023); 
[5] Kakkar, S., Gupta, P., Yadav, S. P. S., Raj, D., Singh, G., et al. Lateral flow assays: Progress and 
evolution of recent trends in point-of-care applications. Mater. Today Bio 28, 101188 (2024); 
[6] Kinyua, D. M., Memeu, D. M., Mugo Mwenda, C. N., Ventura, B. D., & Velotta, R. Advancements 
and applications of lateral flow assays (LFAs): A comprehensive review. Sensors 25, 5414 (2025); 
[7] Jung, Y., Kim, S., Kim, M. G., Lee, Y. E., Shin, M. G., & Yang, S. One-step detection of vancomycin 
in whole blood using the lateral flow immunoassay. Biosensors 14, 129 (2024); 
[8] Han, G. R., & Kim, M. G. Highly sensitive chemiluminescence-based lateral flow immunoassay for 
cardiac troponin I detection in human serum. Sensors 20, 2593 (2020); 
[9] Kim, H. T., Jin, E., & Lee, M. H. Portable chemiluminescence-based lateral flow assay platform for 
the detection of cortisol in human serum. Biosensors 11, 191 (2021); 
[10] Jung, C., & Kim, M. G. Direct use of a saliva-collected cotton swab in lateral flow immunoassay for 
the detection of cotinine. Biosensors 12, 214 (2022); 
[11] Patil, A. A., Kaushik, P., Jain, R. D., & Dandekar, P. P. Assessment of urinary biomarkers for 
infectious diseases using lateral flow assays: a comprehensive overview. ACS Infect. Dis. 9, 9-22 (2022); 
[12] Ballard, Z., Brown, C., Madni, A. M., & Ozcan, A. Machine learning and computation-enabled 
intelligent sensor design. Nat. Mach. Intell. 3, 556-565 (2021); 
[13] Jeon, J., Choi, H., Han, G. R., Ghosh, R., Palanisamy, B., Di Carlo, D., Ozcan, A., & Park, S. Paper-
based Vertical Flow Assays for in Vitro Diagnostics and Environmental Monitoring. ACS sensors 10, 
3317-3339 (2025); 
[14] Goncharov, A., Joung, H. A., Ghosh, R., Han, G. R., Ballard, Z. S., et al. Deep Learning‐Enabled 
Multiplexed Point‐of‐Care Sensor using a Paper‐Based Fluorescence Vertical Flow Assay. Small 19, 
2300617 (2023);  
[15] Joung, H. A., Ballard, Z. S., Wu, J., Tseng, D. K., Teshome, H., et al. Point-of-care serodiagnostic 
test for early-stage Lyme disease using a multiplexed paper-based immunoassay and machine learning. 
ACS nano 14, 229-240 (2019); 
[16] Zhang, T., Deng, R., Wang, Y., Wu, C., Zhang, K., et al. A paper-based assay for the colorimetric 
detection of SARS-CoV-2 variants at single-nucleotide resolution. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 6, 957-967 (2022); 
[17] Eryilmaz, M., Goncharov, A., Han, G. R., Joung, H. A., Ballard, Z. S., et al. A paper-based 
multiplexed serological test to monitor immunity against SARS-COV-2 Using machine learning. ACS 
nano 18, 16819-16831 (2024); 

11 

 
 
 
[18] Ballard, Z. S., Joung, H. A., Goncharov, A., Liang, J., Nugroho, K., Di Carlo, D., Garner, O. B., & 
Ozcan, A. Deep learning-enabled point-of-care sensing using multiplexed paper-based sensors. NPJ digit. 
Med. 3, 66 (2020); 
[19] Ghosh, R., Joung, H. A., Goncharov, A., Palanisamy, B., Ngo, K., et al. Rapid single-tier 
serodiagnosis of Lyme disease. Nat. commun. 15, 7124 (2024); 
[20] Han, G. R., Goncharov, A., Eryilmaz, M., Joung, H. A., Ghosh, R., et al. Deep learning-enhanced 
paper-based vertical flow assay for high-sensitivity troponin detection using nanoparticle amplification. 
ACS nano 18, 27933-27948 (2024); 
[21] Han, G. R., Goncharov, A., Eryilmaz, M., Ye, S., Joung, H. A., Deep Learning‐Enhanced 
Chemiluminescence Vertical Flow Assay for High‐Sensitivity Cardiac Troponin I Testing. Small 21, 
2411585 (2025); 
[22] Hatem, R., Simmons, B., & Thornton, J. E. A call to address AI “hallucinations” and how healthcare 
professionals can mitigate their risks. Cureus 15, (2023); 
[23] Zhang, J., & Zhang, Z. M. Ethics and governance of trustworthy medical artificial intelligence. BMC 
Med. Inform. Decis. Mak. 23, 7 (2023); 
[24] Wadden, J. J. Defining the undefinable: the black box problem in healthcare artificial intelligence. J. 
Med. Ethics 48, 764-768 (2022); 
[25] Lambert, B., Forbes, F., Doyle, S., Dehaene, H., & Dojat, M. Trustworthy clinical AI solutions: A 
unified review of uncertainty quantification in Deep Learning models for medical image analysis. Artif. 
Intell. Med. 150, 102830 (2024). 
[26] Abdar, M., Khosravi, A., Islam, S. M. S., Acharya, U. R., & Vasilakos, A. V. The need for 
quantification of uncertainty in artificial intelligence for clinical data analysis: increasing the level of trust 
in the decision-making process. IEEE SMC 8, 28-40 (2022); 
[27] Hüllermeier, E., & Waegeman, W. Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in machine learning: An 
introduction to concepts and methods. Mach. Learn. 110, 457-506 (2021); 
[28] Evans, H., & Snead, D. Why do errors arise in artificial intelligence diagnostic tools in 
histopathology and how can we minimize them?. Histopathol. 84, 279-287 (2024); 
[29] Celi, L. A., Cellini, J., Charpignon, M. L., Dee, E. C., Dernoncourt, F. Sources of bias in artificial 
intelligence that perpetuate healthcare disparities—A global review. PLOS digit. health 1, e0000022 
(2022); 
[30] Flynn, C. D., & Chang, D. Artificial intelligence in point-of-care biosensing: challenges and 
opportunities. Diagnostics 14, 1100 (2024); 
[31] Gal, Y., & Ghahramani, Z. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing model uncertainty in 
deep learning. PMLR, 1050-1059 (2016); 
[32] Kwon, Y., Won, J. H., Kim, B. J., & Paik, M. C. Uncertainty quantification using Bayesian neural 
networks in classification: Application to biomedical image segmentation. Comput. Stat. Data Anal. 142, 
106816 (2020); 
[33] Avci, M. Y., et al. Improving accuracy and uncertainty quantification of deep learning based 
quantitative MRI using Monte Carlo dropout. arXiv Preprint at (2021); 
[34] Ahn, S. H., et al. Uncertainty Quantification in Automated Detection of Vertebral Metastasis Using 
Ensemble Monte Carlo Dropout. JIIM, 1-16 (2024); 
[35] Orlando, J. I., et al. U2-net: A bayesian u-net model with epistemic uncertainty feedback for 
photoreceptor layer segmentation in pathological oct scans. ISBI, 1441-1445 (2019); 
[36] Steere, A. C. Lyme disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 345, 115–125 (2001); 
[37] Bobe, J. R., et al. Recent progress in Lyme disease and remaining challenges. Front. Med. 8, 666554 
(2021); 
[38] Stanek, G., Wormser, G. P., Gray, J., & Strle, F. Lyme borreliosis. The Lancet 379, 461-473 (2012); 

12 

 
[39] Rosenberg, R. Vital signs: trends in reported vectorborne disease cases—United States and 
Territories, 2004–2016. MMWR 67, (2018); 
[40] Moore, A., Nelson, C., Molins, C., Mead, P. & Schriefer, M. Current guidelines, common clinical 
pitfalls, and future directions for laboratory diagnosis of Lyme disease, United States. Emerg. Infect. 
Dis. 22, 1169–1177 (2016); 
[41] Branda, J. A. et al. Advances in serodiagnostic testing for Lyme disease are at hand. Clin. Infect. 
Dis. 66, 1133–1139 (2018); 
[42] Joung, H.-A. et al. Point-of-care serodiagnostic test for early-stage Lyme disease using a multiplexed 
paper-based immunoassay and machine learning. ACS Nano 14, 229–240 (2020); 
[43] Signorino, G., Arnaboldi, P. M., Petzke, M. M. & Dattwyler, R. J. Identification of OppA2 linear 
epitopes as serodiagnostic markers for Lyme disease. Clin. Vaccin. Immunol. 21, 704–711 (2014); 
[44] Toumanios, C., Prisco, L., Dattwyler, R. J. & Arnaboldi, P. M. Linear B cell epitopes derived from 
the multifunctional surface lipoprotein BBK32 as targets for the serodiagnosis of Lyme 
disease. mSphere 4, e00111–e00119 (2019); 
[45] Arnaboldi, P. M., Katseff, A. S., Sambir, M. & Dattwyler, R. J. Linear peptide epitopes derived from 
ErpP, p35, and FlaB in the serodiagnosis of Lyme disease. Pathogens 11, 944 (2022); 
[46] Wormser, G. P. et al. The clinical assessment, treatment, and prevention of Lyme disease, human 
granulocytic anaplasmosis, and Babesiosis: clinical practice guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society 
of America. Clin. Infect. Dis. 43, 1089–1134 (2006). 
[47] Proposed Regulatory Framework for Modifications to Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning 
(AI/ML)-Based Software as a Medical Device (SaMD), U.S. Food & Drug Administration 
webpage, https://www.fda.gov/files/medical%20devices/published/US-FDA-Artificial-Intelligence-and-
Machine-Learning-Discussion-Paper.pdf (2019). 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Overview of the computational point-of-care sensing pipeline with uncertainty 
quantification. The pipeline outputs a reliability action for each sensor, classified as either “Trust” or 
“Do not use”. A “Trust” outcome indicates that the sensor measurement has passed reliability testing 
and that the corresponding diagnostic prediction can be used in the clinical decision-making process. 
In contrast, a “Do not use” outcome signifies that the test result is unreliable and that the associated 
diagnostic prediction should be excluded from the diagnostic workflow. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Monte Carlo dropout (MCDO)-based uncertainty quantification method for a classification neural 
network model. The baseline model score is compared with the distribution of scores generated by N MCDO 
models to perform uncertainty quantification in an autonomous manner, without access to ground truth patient 
information. Based on this comparison, each sample undergoes reliability assessment and is assigned one of 
the two reliability actions: “Trust”, indicating that the prediction has passed the uncertainty testing, or “Do not 
use”, indicating that the prediction has failed the test and should be excluded from the clinical workflow. 

15 

 
 
 
 
   Figure 3. (a) Overview of the multiplexed vertical flow assay (xVFA) platform for Lyme disease 

diagnostics. (b) Monte Carlo dropout (MCDO)-based uncertainty quantification pipeline in the xVFA 
platform. For each xVFA sample, the score from the Lyme diagnostic model (L0) is compared with the 
score distribution from the MCDO Lyme models (Ln). Based on this comparison, an uncertainty figure of 
merit (F) is computed and evaluated against the uncertainty figure of merit threshold (Fth) to assign 
reliability action to each samples as either “Trust” or “Do not use”. Samples with F ≥ Fth are labeled as 
“Trust”, indicating that the corresponding diagnostic predictions can be used for clinical decision-making.  
Samples with F < Fth are labeled as “Do not use”, indicating unreliable predictions that should be 
excluded from diagnostic interpretation. (c) Table for a few representative patient samples from the blind 
16 
testing set summarizing ground truth Lyme diagnostics, L0 scores and diagnostic predictions, distributions 
of Ln scores, computed F values, and the resulting reliability actions. 

 
Figure 4. (a) Histogram, summarizing the Lyme model (L0) scores and the corresponding distributions 
of the MCDO-based Lyme model (Ln) outputs for 93 xVFA samples from the validation dataset, 
sorted from top to bottom by increasing L0 scores. (b) Uncertainty figure of merit (F) computed for 
samples from the validation dataset. Green and pink colors represent Lyme negative and Lyme 
positive samples, respectively, as predicted by L0. Each sample is assigned a reliability action based on 
= 8.5) are assigned a 
its F value. Samples with F values below uncertainty figure of merit threshold (F

th

“Do not use” action, indicating that the corresponding L0 predictions are unreliable, and should be 
excluded from clinical decision-making. Samples with F values above or equal to F

 are assigned a 

th

“Trust” action, indicating that the corresponding L0 predictions are reliable and suitable for clinical 
interpretation. (c) L0 diagnostic predictions for the validation dataset before (left) and after (right) the 
application of the MCDO-based reliability testing step. 

17 

 
 
Figure 5. Same as Figure 4, except for the blind testing dataset with new patient samples, never seen before. 
(a) Histogram, summarizing the Lyme model (L0) scores and the corresponding distributions of Monte Carlo 
dropout (MCDO) Lyme model (Ln) outputs for 87 xVFA samples from the blind testing dataset, sorted from 
top to bottom by increasing L0 scores. (b) Uncertainty figure of merit (F) computed for samples from the blind 
testing dataset. Green and pink colors represent Lyme negative and Lyme positive samples, respectively, as 
predicted by L0. Each sample is assigned a reliability action based on its F value. Samples with F values 
below uncertainty figure of merit threshold (F

= 8.5) are assigned a “Do not use” action, indicating that the 

th

corresponding L0 predictions are unreliable, and should be excluded from clinical decision-making. Samples 
with F values above or equal to F

 are assigned a “Trust” action, indicating that the corresponding L0 

th

predictions are reliable and suitable for clinical interpretation. (c) L0 diagnostic predictions for the blind 
testing dataset before (left) and after (right) the application of the MCDO-based reliability testing step. 

18 

 
  
 
