Transcriptome-Conditioned Personalized De Novo
Drug Generation for AML Using Metaheuristic
Assembly and Target-Driven Filtering

Abdullah G. Elafifi1

, Basma Mamdouh2, Mariam Hanafy3, Muhammed Alaa Eldin4,

Yosef Khaled5, Nesma Mohamed El-Gelany6, Tarek H.M. Abou-El-Enien7

,

120221238@stud.fci-cu.edu.eg, 211410120221036@stud.cu.edu.eg, 311410120221146@stud.cu.edu.eg,
420211083@stud.fci-cu.edu.eg, 511410120221244@stud.cu.edu.eg,
6n.mohamed@fci-cu.edu.eg, 7t.hanafy@fci-cu.edu.eg

1–7 Department of Operations Research and Decision Support,
Faculty of Computers and Artificial Intelligence, Cairo University, Giza, Egypt

1 ABSTRACT
Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) remains a clinical chal-
lenge due to its extreme molecular heterogeneity and high re-
lapse rates. While precision medicine has introduced mutation-
specific therapies, many patients still lack effective, personal-
ized options. This paper presents a novel, end-to-end computa-
tional framework that bridges the gap between patient-specific
transcriptomics and de novo drug discovery. By analyzing
bulk RNA sequencing data from the TCGA-LAML cohort, the
study utilized Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analy-
sis (WGCNA) to prioritize 20 high-value biomarkers, includ-
ing metabolic transporters like HK3 and immune-modulatory
receptors such as SIGLEC9. The physical structures of
these targets were modeled using AlphaFold3, and druggable
hotspots were quantitatively mapped via the DOGSiteScorer
engine. Then developed a novel, a reaction-first evolutionary
metaheuristic algorithm as well as multi-objective optimiza-
tion programming that assembles novel ligands from frag-
ment libraries, guided by spatial alignment to these identified
hotspots. The generative model produced structurally unique
chemical entities with a strong bias toward drug-like space, as
evidenced by QED scores peaking between 0.5 and 0.7. Val-
idation through ADMET profiling and SwissDock molecular
docking identified high-confidence candidates, such as Ligand
L1, which achieved a binding free energy of -6.571 kcal/mol
against the A08A96 biomarker. These results demonstrate that
integrating systems biology with metaheuristic molecular as-
sembly can produce pharmacologically viable, patient-tailored
leads, offering a scalable blueprint for precision oncology in
AML and beyond.
Index Terms—Precision oncology, Acute Myeloid Leukemia
(AML), Transcriptomics, De novo drug generation, Computa-
tional drug design, Metaheuristic Assembly, Ligand generation.

2

INTRODUCTION

Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) is an aggressive hemato-
logical malignancy characterized by uncontrolled proliferation
of myeloblasts in the bone marrow, leading to rapid disease
progression if untreated. The accumulation of leukemic cells
disrupts normal hematopoiesis, resulting in anemia, infections,
infiltration of
bleeding disorders, and,

in advanced cases,

peripheral blood and extramedullary tissues [1]. AML arises
from genetic alterations in hematopoietic progenitor cells,
although the precise mechanisms driving these mutations
remain incompletely understood. A combination of environ-
mental exposures, prior therapeutic interventions, and inherited
predispositions has been associated with increased disease risk
[1]. AML treatment strategies include intensive chemother-
apy, radiotherapy, hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation,
and targeted therapies, with treatment selection guided by
disease subtype, molecular characteristics, and patient fitness.
Standard therapy is typically divided into induction and post-
remission phases. Induction therapy aims to achieve complete
remission by eliminating leukemic blasts, while post-remission
therapy targets residual disease to prevent relapse [1]. Clin-
ically, AML is diagnosed when myeloblasts constitute at
least 20Despite therapeutic advances, AML outcomes remain
poor. Global incidence increases with age, with an estimated
3–5 cases per 100,000 individuals annually, accounting for
nearly one-third of adult leukemia cases. Epidemiological data
from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)
program project approximately 22,010 new AML cases and
11,090 AML-related deaths in the United States in 2025,
with a 5-year relative survival rate of only 32.9Moreover, the
implementation of intensive chemotherapy is highly resource
dependent. High treatment costs, prolonged hospitalization,
and the need for specialized supportive care limit accessibility
in low- and middle-income settings. As a result, therapeutic
strategies must be adapted to local healthcare capacities to
ensure safe and equitable AML management [3]. These limi-
tations highlight the urgent need for more effective, accessible,
and individualized treatment approaches. Precision medicine
has emerged as a transformative paradigm in oncology, shifting
treatment strategies from uniform protocols toward patient-
specific approaches informed by molecular tumor characteris-
tics [5]. Advances in high-throughput sequencing technologies
have enabled comprehensive profiling of genetic and transcrip-
tomic alterations, while patient-derived experimental models

5
2
0
2

c
e
D
4
2

]

G
L
.
s
c
[

1
v
1
0
3
1
2
.
2
1
5
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

 
 
 
 
 
 
support functional drug testing and validation. Together, these
developments have expanded the therapeutic landscape to in-
clude targeted agents, antibody–drug conjugates, and emerging
modalities such as gene- and mRNA-based therapies [5]. Ef-
fective implementation of precision oncology requires scalable
computational frameworks capable of integrating molecular
data with predictive modeling and robust validation strategies.

In AML,

transcriptomic profiling has enabled detailed
characterization of patient-specific gene expression patterns,
facilitating the identification of dysregulated genes and path-
ways that may serve as therapeutic targets. Incorporating
transcriptomic information into computational drug design
pipelines provides an opportunity to guide ligand genera-
tion toward molecular features specific to individual patients,
potentially improving efficacy while minimizing off-target
effects. Structure-based de novo drug design aims to generate
novel ligands directly from the three-dimensional structure of
a target protein, independent of prior ligand knowledge [6].
However, the vastness of chemical space and the sparsity of
bioactive regions present significant challenges [6]. Computa-
tional strategies address these challenges by constraining the
search space through fragment-based assembly and structure-
guided exploration of chemically compatible substructures [6].
Evolutionary and genetic algorithms have been widely applied
to de novo drug design due to their ability to efficiently
explore large, complex, and discontinuous search spaces [6].
These population-based metaheuristic methods iteratively gen-
erate candidate molecules, evaluate their fitness, and evolve
improved solutions through stochastic processes such as se-
lection, crossover, and mutation [7]. Importantly, evolutionary
algorithms enable simultaneous optimization of multiple ob-
jectives, including biological activity, drug-likeness, ADMET
properties, and synthetic feasibility, and can identify Pareto-
optimal solutions when objectives conflict [6 ] [7].

The increasing cost, duration, and high attrition rates of
traditional drug discovery pipelines have driven the adoption
of Computer-Aided Drug Discovery (CADD) methodologies
[8]. Advances in structural biology have made high-quality
macromolecular structures increasingly available, establishing
structure-based approaches as central components of modern
drug design [8]. While ligand-based drug design remains
valuable when structural data are unavailable, its effectiveness
depends on existing ligand diversity and is limited by
[9].
alignment and conformational
When reliable target structures are accessible, structure-based
strategies provide a more direct and informative framework
for rational ligand design [9]. By integrating patient-specific
transcriptomic profiles with structure-based de novo drug
design, evolutionary optimization, and target-driven filtering,
this work proposes a personalized computational framework
for AML therapeutics. This approach combines molecular
specificity, structural insight, and computational efficiency to
address key limitations of conventional treatment strategies
and advance precision medicine for AML.

sampling challenges

3 LITERATURE REVIEW

and

clinically

AML is molecularly

enabling signature-reversal

heterogeneous,
which has motivated precision approaches
to therapy.
Recurrent driver alterations FLT3-ITD, NPM1, DNMT3A
define subgroups with distinct biology, prognosis, and
drug-sensitivity profiles; moreover, clonal evolution and
treatment-induced resistance remain major challenges for
long-term disease control [10]. Standard-of-care evolution in
AML now includes small-molecule targeted agents such as
the most popular one FLT3 inhibitors, epigenetic modulators,
and BCL-2 inhibition in combination regimens, but responses
are variable and relapse is common, emphasizing the need for
personalized discovery strategies [11]. Using gene-expression
signatures to connect diseases, genes, and compounds is
a well-established paradigm that underpins transcriptome-
conditioned drug discovery. The original Connectivity Map
demonstrated that perturbation expression signatures can
reveal mechanistic links between small molecules and disease
repurposing strategies
states,
[12]. The Library of
Integrated Network-Based Cellular
Signatures program dramatically expanded this idea via the
L1000 platform, producing large compendia of compound and
perturbation-induced signatures useful for connectivity scoring
and signature inversion workflows. Tools and derivative
resources
such as CREEDS and L1000FWD provide
precomputed signatures and visualization/search interfaces
that are commonly used for expression-driven repurposing
and hypothesis generation [12], [13]. These methods form
a natural foundation for conditioning molecule design on
patient transcriptomes but generally stop short of generating
new chemotypes tailored to individual signatures. While
having these difficulties with generating new chemotype, the
translating transcriptomic perturbation into actionable targets
typically requires
resources.
Systematic genetic screens RNAi/CRISPR and the Cancer
identifying
Dependency Map have become critical
essential genes and context-specific vulnerabilities, while
knowledgebases such as OncoKB provide clinical annotations
linking genomic events to therapeutic strategies [14]. Network
and pathway approaches are widely used to prioritize target
candidates from patient-level omics. These resources make it
feasible to connect patient signatures with mechanistic targets
for downstream filtering or scoring of designed molecules.
The de novo molecular generation has evolved rapidly,
variational
spanning SMILES-based
autoencoders
networks
generative
(GANs), and graph-based deep generative models [15].
Work by G´omez-Bombarelli et al. established continuous
latent-space VAEs for molecule optimization; subsequent
graph-focused architectures such as the Junction Tree VAE
advanced generation of chemically valid molecular graphs by
assembling scaffolds and substructures [16]. Implicit graph
generative models (MolGAN) and many later graph-neural
approaches improved chemical validity and property control
language
for generated compounds [17]. Large chemical

integration with orthogonal

language models,

adversarial

(VAEs),

for

compatible with metaheuristic

models for SMILES/SELFIES transformers and conditional
generation techniques have further broadened the design
toolkit. While powerful, most deep generative methods are
trained on a population-level chemistry and are optimized
toward physicochemical objectives rather than patient-specific
biology. Fragment-based drug discovery (FBDD)
is an
established strategy in medicinal chemistry that screens small,
low-molecular-weight fragments and grows or links them
into potent leads. Computational fragment enumeration and
recombination often using retrosynthetic fragmentation rules
such as BRICS are used to create chemically sensible fragment
libraries and enable scaffold assembly approaches in silico
[19]. Fragment-aware generative and combinatorial
[18],
assembly methods allow exploration of chemical
space
with more synthetically plausible building blocks and are
recombination
naturally
strategies such as linking, and crossover of fragment sets The
evolutionary and metaheuristic algorithms have a long history
in computational molecular design and remain competitive
with deep generative models for certain tasks. Recent work
has adapted graph-based genetic algorithms, multi-objective
evolutionary optimization and hybrid approaches that combine
genetic search with learned models or Monte Carlo tree search
[20]. Evolutionary/metaheuristic methods are particularly
appealing when the objective function is complex because
they can directly incorporate docking, synthetic-accessibility
filters, and domain-specific crossover/mutation rules
for
fragments [21]. These characteristics make metaheuristics a
natural fit for fragment-assembly pipelines conditioned on
biological objectives. Post-generation filtering and ranking
are essential
to practical de novo pipelines. Traditional
structure-based virtual screening uses docking engines and
scoring functions to estimate binding modes and approximate
affinities; modern deep learning approaches have introduced
fast, learning-based pose prediction and generative docking
which can both accelerate and sometimes improve pose
in
quality relative to exhaustive search [22]. In addition,
silico ADMET and off-target prediction models are routinely
applied to filter candidates for toxicity, pharmacokinetics,
and polypharmacology risk. Combining these structure-
and property-aware filters with transcriptome-derived target
for
priorities
generated molecules [23]. There is growing interest
in
conditioning molecule design on biological context, but most
prior efforts are limited to repurposing/selection of existing
compounds based on signature matching, or population-level
conditional generation. Direct generation of novel, patient-
tailored chemotypes that are simultaneously conditioned
on transcriptomic signatures, assembled by fragment-aware
metaheuristics, and filtered against prioritized targets with
structure-aware docking remains an open niche [23]. Taken
together, the shows strong literature, independent progress in
expression-based disease mapping and signature databases,
generative chemistry,
fragment and metaheuristic search
strategies, and modern structure-aware filtering. However,
these advances have largely been applied in disconnected

target-driven validation funnel

enables

a

TABLE I
CATEGORIZATION AND INTERPRETATION OF GENE EXPRESSION LEVELS
BASED ON NORMALIZED TRANSCRIPTOMIC VALUES

Range/Value

Interpretation

0
1
2–3
> 4
> 6

No expression
Very low expression
Moderate expression
High expression
Very high expression

workflows. The proposed approach explicitly bridges these
fields by using patient transcriptomes to condition fragment
assembly via new hybrid metaheuristic search while enforcing
target-driven structural and ADMET filters an integration
designed to produce AML-personalized candidate molecules
with plausible binding modes and acceptable drug-like
properties.

4 METHODOLOGY

4.1 Data acquisition

To generate a personalised de novo drug design framework
for AML in the method of SBDD, this work utilises bulk RNA
sequencing data, a standard approach in precision oncology for
capturing average gene expression across a mixed population
of tumour cells. Bulk RNA-seq enables the identification of
dysregulated genes, signalling pathways, and transcriptional
signatures relevant to therapeutic targeting. The proposed work
is based on the Cancer Genome Atlas Program (TCGA)
exon expression from the University of California, Santa Cruz
(UCSC) genome characterisation centre at Xena Browser [24].
It allows scientists to explore functional genomic data sets
for correlations between genomic and/or phenotypic variables.
The primary dataset is from experimentally measured exon-
level
transcription estimates by RNAseq Illumina’s HiSeq
2000 sequencing system, enabling individual labs to take on
larger and more complex studies, including routine human
genome sequencing with a High Accuracy and Unprecedented
Output [25]. The dataset contains 173 samples, each rep-
resented as a column following the TCGA barcode format
TCGA-SS-PPPP-TT.

Because the dataset is provided at the exon level, proper
genomic mapping is essential to ensure that both the raw
RPKM values and the processed log2 (RPKM+1) data can
be accurately interpreted. Each row in the TCGA AML
exon matrix corresponds not to a gene name but to a ge-
nomic coordinate. These coordinates must be mapped to their
corresponding exon identifiers, gene symbols, and transcript
annotations. To achieve this, the UCSC Xena platform uses
a specialized probeMap that links each genomic coordinate
to its annotated exon within the hg19 reference genome.
This mapping step ensures that raw level exon quantification
files and their transformed data counterparts are aligned to
the exact same exon definitions, preventing inconsistencies
in annotation, misinterpretation of transcript structure, or er-

pockets. A multi-objective fitness function is employed to
explore the generated ligands and assign scores at different
checkpoints based on Fragment-Based Assembly, resulting in
top-generated candidate ligands in PDB and SDP formats.
These ligands are subjected to different aspects of testing,
including but not limited to ADMET properties, Molecular
Weight (MW), and Topological Polar Surface Area (TPSA).

4.3 Transcriptomic Profiling & Preprocessing

To generate robust molecular inputs for the downstream
drug generation pipeline, the raw transcriptomic data under-
went a rigorous three-step preprocessing protocol designed to
aggregate genomic signals, filter for druggable targets, and
reduce dimensionality.

4.3.1 Exon-to-Gene Aggregation: Raw exon-level ex-
pression data was first mapped to gene-level profiles to pro-
vide a biologically interpretable format. Using the UNC v2
exon-to-hg19 probe mapping reference, exon identifiers were
aligned with their corresponding Human Genome Organisation
(HUGO) gene symbols. To derive a single expression value
for each gene, after computed the arithmetic mean of all
exon probes associated with that specific gene locus. This
into a
step condensed the high-dimensional exon dataset
gene-level expression matrix: Mgenes×samples , ensuring that
transcriptional activity was represented per functional gene
unit.

4.3.2 Protein-Coding Biotype Filtration: It was essential
to exclude non-coding RNA and pseudogenes. The meto-
hed is utilized the ”mygene” Python library to query the
type_of_gene field for all gene symbols in the aggregated
dataset against the human reference database. A strict inclusion
filter was applied to retain only genes classified as ”protein-
coding.” This filtration step ensures that all subsequent can-
didate biomarkers represent physically translatable structures
capable of forming ligand-binding pockets.

4.3.3 Normalization and Highly Variable Gene (HVG)
Selection: To account for the heteroscedasticity inherent in
RNA-seq data and to focus the analysis on biologically dis-
tinct signals, the filtered dataset underwent normalization and
feature selection:

The bimodal distribution is characteristic of high-quality
data: the left peak represents low-abundance background noise,
while the right peak represents actively expressed genes. The
lack of deviant curves confirms the absence of major batch
effects. Low-Expression Filtering is used to reduce technical
noise, genes with a mean log-transformed expression value
below a threshold of 0.5 across the cohort were discarded.
Moreover, the HVG Selection is a primary step that prioritized
genes contributing the most to patient heterogeneity. Variance
was calculated for each gene across all samples. The genes
were ranked by variance, and the top N=2,000 Highly Variable
Genes (HVGs) were selected. These HVGs serve as the
input for the Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis
(WGCNA) in Phase 2, ensuring the network is built on drivers
of molecular variation rather than housekeeping genes.

Fig. 1. An end-to-end in silico workflow for identifying surface-expressed
biomarkers and optimizing candidate small-molecule inhibitors.

rors in gene-level aggregation. Without
this coordinate-to-
exon mapping, the expression matrix would contain numerical
values disconnected from their biological context, making it
impossible to determine which genes or functional regions are
dysregulated in AML.

4.2 The Transcriptome-Conditioned De Novo Drug Gener-
ation Pipeline for AML

To translate raw transcriptomic data into personalized drug
candidates tailored to specific molecular targets, this study
developed a multi-stage computational pipeline. The workflow
follows a sequential logic from data preprocessing to structural
modeling and finally, evolutionary ligand design. The pipeline
consists of five primary phases: Phase (1): The objective of
this phase is to reduce noise and isolate biologically relevant
signals from the raw data. This phase includes exon-to-gene
aggregation, protein-coding filtration, additional normaliza-
tion, and feature selection. This transcriptomic preprocessing
resulted in proteins designated as biomarkers (targets) for the
future generation of the ligand. Phase (2): Systems biology
approaches are utilized in this phase to identify critical driver
genes (biomarkers) rather than simple differential expression.
The process includes co-expression network construction,
module detection, hub gene identification, and targetability
filtering. Network-based target discovery and prioritization
are based on intramodular connectivity,
involving various
steps to result in valid biomarkers, specifically the top 20.
Phase (3): Once the biomarkers are prioritized, their physical
structures the ”locks” for the potential drugs must be modeled.
This is a short but vital step in structural modeling, which
includes the retrieval of target biomarkers using AlphaFold3
and the filtering out of unknown proteins via Quality Control
(pLDDT). Phase (4): Before ligand generation, the precise
binding interface on the target protein is defined through
critical and intensive work to detect binding pockets on the
targets (hotspot mapping). This resulted in coordinates being
extracted and saved in JSON metadata to coordinate systems
to guide the ligand assembly process in the next phase. Phase
(5): A custom-built Genetic Algorithm (GA) is utilized in
this phase to evolve novel molecules that fit the Phase 4

Fig. 2. Library sizes were calculated by summing read counts per sample;
which the histogram displays a Gaussian-like distribution centered around the
mean count depth. The absence of heavy tails indicates no failed libraries or
significant outliers in sequence

Fig. 4. Expression values of the top HVGs were Z-score normalized by gene
and clustered using Euclidean distance and Ward’s linkage.

Fig. 3. The probability density function of gene expression was estimated
using Kernel Density Estimation (KDE); which is the plot shows highly
consistent expression profiles across all samples (overlapping curves)

The heatmap in the figure 4 validates the selection process,
revealing distinct gene modules. The ”checkerboard” pattern
indicates that these genes effectively capture the molecular het-
erogeneity necessary to distinguish potential subtypes within
the dataset. Following HVG selection, a validation process
occurred in the data structure using linear and non-linear
dimensionality reduction techniques to ensure the dataset
contained discernable biological signals as.

The pairwise Pearson correlation matrix reveals low global
correlation blue areas, confirming biological heterogeneity.
However, distinct blocks of high correlation by red diagonal
identify cliques of samples with similar transcriptional profiles,
suggesting the presence of molecular subtypes.

PCA at Figure 6A reveals that

the top two compo-

Fig. 5. Sample-Sample Correlation Matrix

nents explain ∼20% of the variance, indicating a complex,
high-dimensional dataset. Both t-SNE and UMAP at Fig-
ure 6A & 6B show a largely continuous distribution of samples
rather than discrete, separated clusters, though a small, distinct
island of samples is visible in the non-linear projections,
potentially representing a rare subtype.

t-SNE, and UMAP: Data was
Fig. 6. Dimensionality Reduction PCA,
projected into 2D space using PCA (linear), t-SNE, and UMAP (non-linear).

Fig. 7. Clustering Analysis where K-means clustering was assessed via
Silhouette scores, and hierarchical clustering was visualized via a dendrogram.

The Silhouette analysis at figure 7B shows generally low
scores (<0.08), consistent with the continuous nature of the
data seen in PCA. While K-means K=3 partitions the PCA
space as shown in figure 7C the boundaries are not strict.
The Hierarchical Dendrogram as shown in figure 7A identifies
roughly five major clades, suggesting that while the data is
continuous, it possesses a hierarchical taxonomy of subtypes
that can be exploited for the AML drug target discovery.

4.4 Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis
(WGCNA)

4.4.1 Rationale and Network Construction: The objec-
tive of this analysis was to transform raw gene expression
profiles into a systems-level understanding of gene–gene inter-
actions in AML, thereby enabling the identification of AML-
specific co-expression modules, biomarker candidates, and
putative therapeutic targets. Co-expression network analysis
was selected because it captures higher-order transcriptional
organization and coordinated gene activity that cannot be
detected through single-gene differential analysis alone.

A weighted gene co-expression network was constructed
using the 2000 HVGs selected in Phase 1. First, a symmetric

Fig. 8. Analysis of Network Topology for Various Soft-Thresholding Powers

gene–gene Pearson correlation matrix was computed across
173 AML samples, capturing linear co-expression patterns:

• High positive correlation indicates genes that exhibit co-
ordinated behavior across AML patients, often reflecting
shared pathway involvement.

• Low or near-zero correlation suggests independent or

uncoordinated transcriptional activity.

To enhance meaningful biological signals while suppressing
noise, the correlation matrix was transformed into a weighted
adjacency matrix using a soft-thresholding power function, as
shown in Equation (1).

Aij = |rij|β

(1)

With β = 6 selected to approximate a scale-free topology
based on Fig. 8A & 8B. This value represents the inflection
point that maximizes the scale-free topology fit (R2 > 0.85)
while maintaining sufficient mean connectivity to ensure the
network remains biologically interconnected and not overly
sparse. This step mirrors the core principle of WGCNA,
ensuring that strong gene–gene relationships contribute dispro-
portionately to module formation. Self-loops were removed by
setting all diagonal entries to zero.

4.4.2 Module Characterization and Hub Gene Identifi-
cation: Each module was summarized by its corresponding
module of eigengene, defined as the first principal component
(PC1) of the module’s normalized expression matrix. For mod-
ules containing at least two genes, eigengenes were computed
using PCA and served as representative expression signatures
that capture dominant transcriptional variation within each
module.

To interrogate the systemic relationships between the eight
identified co-expression modules,
the constructed Module
Eigengene Network was implemented. For each module, a
”Module Eigengene” (ME) defined as the first principal com-
ponent of the module’s expression matrix was calculated
to represent its summary expression profile. Then computed
the Pearson correlation matrix between all pairwise MEs.
Intramodular hub genes were then identified by quantifying in-
tramodular connectivity, where genes with the highest summed
edge weights within a module were classified as hubs. Hub
genes are particularly important because, with a total of 8
modules that shown at figure 9,

TABLE III
TOP 20 CANDIDATE BIOMARKERS SELECTED FROM THE
WGCNA-RANKED GENE LIST AFTER EXCLUDING HEMOGLOBIN-RELATED
GENES

Biomarker

Targetability

Function & AML Relevance

S100A9

HK3

SLC7A7

RBM47

MEFV

LILRA5

SIGLEC9

CD300E

LILRA6

FGD2

VCAN

FGL2

SLC11A1

C5AR1

S100A12

NCF2

NCF1

CD1D

Fig. 9. Global Topology of the AML Transcriptome intramodular via Chord
Diagram

TABLE II
CRITERIA FOR IDENTIFYING CANDIDATE THERAPEUTIC TARGETS
THROUGH INTRAMODULAR CONNECTIVITY AND HUB GENE ANALYSIS

Co-expression Result

Interpretation

HVGs → modules

Module eigengene (PC1)

Intramodular connectiv-
ity (kWithin)

Hub genes

Select biologically meaningful gene sets; re-
duce noise and focus on AML-relevant pat-
terns.
Summarizes module expression and is used to
track overall module activity across samples.
Identifies strong biomarker candidates that act
as key regulators of AML transcriptional net-
works.
Quantifies gene centrality; highly connected
genes are prioritized as therapeutic targets.

Alarmins
Inflammatory

Secreted
&
Mediators
Intracellular Enzymes
& Metabolic Regula-
tors
Surface / Secreted

Intracellular Metabolic
/ Signaling

Intracellular Enzymes
& Metabolic Regula-
tors
Surface Receptors &
Transporters

Surface Receptors &
Transporters
Surface Receptors &
Transporters
Surface Receptors &
Transporters
Intracellular Enzymes
& Metabolic Regula-
tors
Secreted
&
Mediators
Secreted
&
Mediators
Surface Receptors &
Transporters
Surface Receptors &
Transporters

Alarmins
Inflammatory

Alarmins
Inflammatory

Alarmins
Inflammatory

Secreted
&
Mediators
Intracellular Enzymes
& Metabolic Regula-
tors
Intracellular Enzymes
& Metabolic Regula-
tors
Surface Receptors &
Transporters

Pro-inflammatory alarmin highly
expressed in AML (M4/M5 sub-
types).
Myeloid-specific hexokinase; over-
expression drives increased gly-
colytic flux.
Cationic amino acid transporter
(y+L system); critical for arginine
uptake.
RNA-binding protein involved in
mRNA stability; regulates myeloid
differentiation.
Encodes Pyrin, a regulator of the
inflammasome; enriched in mono-
cytic AML.
Innate immune receptor; activation
triggers pro-inflammatory cytokine
release.
in-
Immunosuppressive receptor
hibiting NK and T-cell cytotoxicity.
Immune-activating
receptor
expressed on myeloid cells.
Immunoglobulin-like receptor reg-
ulating immune activation.
CDC42-specific GEF;
actin cytoskeleton remodeling.

regulates

ECM proteoglycan promoting blast
motility and leukemic niche forma-
tion.
Immunomodulatory protein pro-
moting T-cell suppression and co-
agulation.
Divalent metal ion transporter reg-
ulating iron homeostasis.
receptor promoting
Complement
immunosuppressive microenviron-
ment.
RAGE ligand mediating chronic
inflammation in AML.

NADPH oxidase subunit regulating
ROS production.

NADPH oxidase cytosolic subunit
enabling superoxide generation.

Lipid antigen-presenting molecule
regulating iNKT cell responses.

Identification and Characterization of Top 20 Biomark-

4.5
ers in AML

4.5.1 Rationale and Selection of Biomarkers: While
the preceding co-expression network analysis considered the
broader landscape of highly variable genes, this step focused
on narrowing the gene set to a manageable subset of highly
informative candidates. To achieve this, a ranking of WGCNA
selection was employed, leveraging the assumption that genes
exhibiting the largest variance across AML patients are most
likely to reflect meaningful biological differences rather than
stochastic noise. Hemoglobin-related genes were excluded

from consideration, as their high expression is often non-
specific and can obscure the detection of true AML-relevant
signals. Following this filtering process,
the top 20 genes
were retained as candidate biomarkers, representing a balance
between variability and biological relevance.

The top 20 prioritized biomarkers reveal a distinct targetable
landscape characterized by the upregulation of myeloid-
lineage surface receptors, metabolic transporters, and secreted
inflammatory mediators. The analysis identified three pri-
mary functional clusters suitable for therapeutic intervention.
First, Solute Carrier (SLC) Transporters such as SLC7A7,

Fig. 10. Hierarchical clustering of the transcriptomic landscape of prioritized
AML biomarkers

SLC11A1, SLC15A3 and the metabolic enzyme HK3 rep-
resent high-value targets for small-molecule inhibition. The
upregulation of the cationic amino acid transporter SLC7A7
suggests a metabolic dependency on exogenous arginine
uptake to fuel
leukemic blast proliferation, a vulnerabil-
ity that can be exploited by starvation strategies or high-
affinity competitive inhibitors. Similarly, HK3 overexpression
underscores the ’Warburg effect’ in AML, offering a de-
fined enzymatic pocket for direct pharmacological blockade.
Second, the immune-modulatory surface receptors SIGLEC9,
LILRA5/6, and CD300E highlight mechanisms of immune
evasion. SIGLEC9, an inhibitory checkpoint receptor, recruits
phosphatases to dampen NK and T-cell cytotoxicity; blocking
its ligand-binding interface could restore anti-leukemic immu-
nity. These surface-accessible proteins are optimal candidates
for both small-molecule modulation (targeting the sialic acid
binding cleft) and antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) delivery. Fi-
nally, the secretome is dominated by the S100 Alarmin Family
such as S100A8, S100A9, S100A12, and FGL2. These factors
condition the bone marrow niche to support chemoresistance
and suppress T-cell function. While traditionally targeted by
neutralizing antibodies, the structural analysis suggests that
their oligomerization interfaces and receptor-binding domains
possess druggable hotspots suitable for novel protein-protein
interaction (PPI) inhibitors generated by the proposed de novo
pipeline.

4.5.2 Exploratory Analysis of Expression Patterns:
Hierarchical clustering was then applied to the top 20 genes
to assess co-expression patterns and potential subgroupings
among patients. A clustered heatmap was generated, which
visualized both gene-gene relationships and patient clustering
simultaneously. This approach allowed the identification of co-
expressed gene clusters, reflecting putative functional modules
within this reduced biomarker set.

To elucidate the systemic interrelationships among the top
20 biomarkers, using a constructed undirected weighted co-
expression network based on pairwise Pearson correlations.
Only gene pairs exceeding a correlation threshold of 0.7

Fig. 11. HViolin plots illustrating the full expression density profiles of
the top 20 biomarkers. The plot emphasizes multimodal and asymmetric
expression patterns in several genes, particularly the highly expressed S100-
family markers, and reveals clear separation between high-, medium-, and
low-expression genes. These density shapes provide additional evidence of
the biomarkers’ discriminatory potential across AML samples

Fig. 12. Boxplots showing the expression distributions of the top 20 selected
biomarkers across AML samples. The plots highlight substantial variability
among genes, with several biomarkers exhibiting markedly higher median
expression and wider dispersion, while others display tighter, lower-expression
ranges. These distributional differences support
to capture
heterogeneous AML-related expression patterns.

their potential

were connected, with edge weights reflecting co-expression
strength. This network topology revealed hub genes with
highly connected nodes likely to act as central drivers of
the identified AML transcriptional program. Additionally, the
network structure uncovered distinct modular subgroups, sug-
gesting shared regulatory mechanisms or functional pathways
suitable for coordinated therapeutic targeting. The heatmap,
combined with hierarchical clustering, reveals sample-level
patternsand identifies potential biomarker subgroups. Den-
drograms, computed using Euclidean distance and average
linkage, offer structural insight into how expression profiles
cluster together, indicating whether biomarkers define coherent
biological modules.

4.5.3 Structural Retrieval and Integration Using Al-
phaFold Models: UniProt accessions were used to fetch
predicted 3D structures from the AlphaFold3 Protein Structure
Database [26]. HTTP requests were used to download each
structure, and all successfully retrieved PDB files were stored
in a structured directory for later inspection. VCAN biomarker
logged and flagged for manual examination because it doesn’t
have an available AlphaFold pdb strucutre. For those with
existing renderings in the project directory, all images were
assembled into a unified figure, ensuring that structural data
could be directly visualized downstream.

Fig. 13. Weighted Gene Co-expression Network of Prioritized Biomarkers

Fig. 15. Dimensionality Reduction Representation of the AML Cohort using
some of the Top 20 Biomarkers

Fig. 14. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering heatmap of therapeutic targets

Finally, all computed metrics values, composite scores,
functional annotations, PCA coordinates, clustering results,
correlation matrices, and structural availability information
were merged into a single organized Excel workbook. This
consolidation step ensures that researchers can navigate seam-
lessly from statistical ranking to biological interpretation and
structural modeling, forming a complete biomarker discovery
framework applicable to AML.

4.5.4 Geometric and Physicochemical Pocket Profiling
with DOGSite: To identify and characterize druggable pockets
within the target protein, we used the DOGSiteScorer engine
provided through the ProteinsPlus API [27]. The workflow
consists of four major stages: structure upload, job execution,
pocket detection, and feature extraction/scoring. The protein
target structure in PDB format was submitted to the DOGSite

Fig. 16. Visualization of retrieved AlphaFold3 final top 19 biomarkers after
excluding VCAN biomarker

endpoint of the ProteinsPlus API. Upon submission, the ser-
vice returned a unique job_id corresponding to a server-
side processing task. This asynchronous workflow ensures that
binding pocket detection is completed prior to downstream
analysis.

TABLE IV
STRUCTURAL AND PHYSICOCHEMICAL PARAMETERS USED FOR THE
CHARACTERIZATION AND EVALUATION OF BINDING POCKET
DRUGGABILITY.

Geometric Properties

Physicochemical
Properties

Residue/Atom-Level Infor-
mation

Volume ( ˚A³): size of
the pocket cavity

Depth: average depth
measured from the sur-
face to the pocket core.

Enclosure (%): degree
of pocket “closedness,”
reflecting how well the
cavity is shielded from
solvent.

aromatic

area
the

Hydrophobicity:
of
proportion
hydrophobic
surface
within
pocket.
Aromaticity:
prevalence
of
residues
contributing
to
interactions.
H-bond donors
and acceptors:
of
counts
donor
and
acceptor atoms,
indicating
potential
hydrogen-
bonding
capability.

π-π

DOGSite internally performs grid-based geometric and
physicochemical analysis on the protein surface to identify
concave regions that exhibit cavity-like properties. The algo-
rithm examines:

• 3D surface topology.
• Local curvature.
• Enclosed volume regions.
• Spatial arrangement of residues and atoms.

After detection, pocket-level physicochemical and geometric
features are retrieved with each entry including the following
quantitative descriptors, which are central for ligandability
assessment.

These features collectively represent the binding potential
of the pocket as shown in table IV. To prioritize the most
promising pockets, a composite scoring function was applied:

Score = 0.3 × Volume + 0.2 × Depth + 0.2 × Enclosure × 100

+0.1 × Hydrophobicity × 100
+0.1 × Aromaticity + 0.1 × (Donors + Acceptors) (2)

This scoring formula balances geometric enclosure (impor-
tant for ligand binding), cavity size, and chemical interaction
potential. After scoring:

• Scores were normalized to a 0-1 scale.
• Pockets were sorted in descending order.
• Enclosed volume regions.
• The top-scoring pocket was selected as the most drug-
gable region for downstream docking and molecular
modeling (taking the top 3 pockets).

The structural analysis of the biomarker A0AV96 revealed
multiple potential ligand-binding sites distributed across its

Residues lining the pocket

3D coordinates of pocket
atoms

Fig. 17. Binding pocket detection for the A0AV96 biomarke; a 3D visu-
alization of the six binding pockets identified by DOGSiteScorer, mapped
onto the surface of A0AV96 and colored by pocket identity. The visualization
highlights the spatial distribution and relative topology of the predicted ligand-
binding sites.

Geometry files for visual-
ization

the 3D
protein surface. Using the DOGSiteScorer engine,
structure of A0AV96 was systematically scanned to identify
surface cavities that exhibit favorable geometric and physico-
chemical characteristics for ligand interaction. The algorithm
detected six distinct binding pockets, each varying in depth,
enclosure, hydrophobicity, and aromatic contribution. These
pockets represent the most probable druggable and function-
ally relevant regions on the biomarker. Visual inspection of
the pocket architecture shows a heterogeneous distribution
of cavity sizes, including both deep, well-enclosed pockets
and more solvent-exposed shallow regions, suggesting the
biomarker may support diverse modes of ligand engagement.

4.6 De Novo Ligand Generation Using Metaheuristic Op-
timization

To design a novel AML-specific small molecules con-
ditioned on transcriptomic signatures, a modular
ligand-
generation framework that integrates metaheuristic fragment
assembly is developed, reaction-driven molecular linking, 3D
pocket–aware placement, and target-driven multi-objective fil-
tering. The system builds candidate molecules through se-
quential fragment selection, spatial alignment toward protein
hotspots, chemical linking through BRICS rules and reaction
SMARTS, and iterative fitness scoring. Simply,
integrates
fragment-based drug design (FBDD) with multi-objective op-
timization to assemble high-affinity, synthetically accessible,
and conformationally stable candidates within the target bind-
ing pocket. The de novo ligand generation workflow was ini-
tialized using a curated fragment library comprising 69 chem-
ically validated substructures, rationally selected to balance
biological relevance, drug-likeness, and synthetic feasibility,
with a strong emphasis on AML-associated targets (FLT3
and IDH). The fragments were organized into the following
categories:

• Privileged Heteroaromatic Scaffolds (10 fragments):
This group includes pyridine-, pyrimidine-, quinoline-
,
isoquinoline-, quinazoline-, purine-like-, and indole-
based cores. These heterocycles are well-established ki-
nase hinge binders and serve as primary recognition el-
ements capable of forming conserved hydrogen-bonding
and π–π stacking interactions within ATP-binding sites.

• AML-Specific Pharmacophores: FLT3 / IDH Motifs
(15 fragments): To bias generation toward clinically
this category incorpo-
relevant AML chemical space,
rates fragments inspired by known FLT3 and IDH in-
hibitors. These include nitrile-containing aromatics, aza-
heterocycles, sulfonamides, and fused nitrogen-rich mo-
tifs that enhance binding affinity and target selectivity.

• Drug-Likeness–Enhancing Moieties

(5 fragments):
Saturated heterocycles such as piperazine, piperidine,
morpholine, and tetrahydrofuran were included to im-
prove aqueous solubility, reduce excessive aromaticity,
and modulate conformational flexibility, thereby support-
ing favorable pharmacokinetic profiles.

• Lipophilicity and Pocket-Complementarity Modula-
tors (5 fragments): Halogenated phenyl fragments con-
taining F, Cl, Br, or I substituents were incorporated
to fine-tune lipophilicity, enhance hydrophobic pocket
complementarity, and improve metabolic stability and
binding residence time.

• Functional Groups and Minimal Pharmacophoric
Units (7 fragments): This set comprises key func-
tional groups such as amides, ureas, carbamates, amino-
alcohols, and short polar chains, enabling chemically
plausible fragment coupling while preserving synthetic
accessibility and interaction diversity.

• Aromatic Drug Fragments and Kinase Hinge Chemo-
types (19 fragments): This category includes substi-
tuted phenyls, anilines, heteroaromatic amides, and mul-
tiple FLT3-focused hinge-binding cores. These fragments
expand aromatic diversity while retaining established
kinase-binding geometries observed in approved and late-
stage inhibitors.

• Adaptive Linkers (6 fragments): Flexible and semi-
rigid linkers, including urea, carbamate, sulfonyl, and
solubilizing chains, were introduced to facilitate con-
trolled fragment assembly and spatial adaptation within
the binding pocket.

• AML-Privileged Kernel Fragments (2 fragments):
Compact FLT3-focused kernel motifs and fused N-
heterocycles were included as minimal pharmacophoric
seeds to initiate the generation of stable, high-affinity
ligands while limiting unnecessary molecular complexity.
Each fragment from the biased AML and basic ones was
parsed from SMILES. After that, they were undergoing rigor-
ous sanitization like valence checks, aromatization, and 3D
embedding using the ETKDG algorithm followed by UFF
minimization to ensure geometrically valid starting conform-
ers; Only conformationally stable fragments were included in
the final library.

4.6.1 Evolutionary Assembly and Genetic Operators:
Fragment Spatial Alignment Using Rodrigues 3D Rotation.
The generation process utilizes a genetic algorithm with a
population size of N = 60 over G = 40 generations. The
algorithm follows a reaction-first strategy, prioritizing chem-
ical validity over random connectivity. The initial population
is generated by randomly selecting fragments and spatially

TABLE V
AML- AND DRUG-BIASED FRAGMENT LIBRARY USED FOR LIGAND
GENERATION

AML/drug-biased fragments

Fragment Class

SMILES

AML-specific privileged kernels

Fused N-hetero

Mini-FLT3 core

Adaptive linkers

FLT3 inhibitors

Drug-likeness privileged moieties

Functional groups

Aromatic drug fragments

Heterocycles

FLT3 / IDH relevant motifs

linker,

hinge

fused

Sulfonyl
IDH inhibitors
Urea linker
Crenolanib
binder
Quinazoline
Purine-like
ring
Dimethyl
piperazine
Morpholine
Acetamide
Amide
Chloro-Phenyl
Fluoro-Phenyl
Pyridine
Pyridine (isomer)
Benzonitrile
CF3 aromatic
Cyclic
benzylamine

c1cc(-
n2cnc3ccccc23)ccc1
c1cc(-
n2ccc(N)nc2)ccc1
NCCS(=O)2

NCC(=O)N
n1ccnc(N)c1

c1ccc2ncncc2c1
c1ncnc2cccc2c1

C1CCN(CC1)C

C1CNCO1
CC(=O)N
NC(=O)C
c1ccc(Cl)cc1
c1ccc(F)cc1
c1ncccc1
c1ccncc1
c1ccc(C#N)cc1
c1cc(CF3)ccc1
c1cccc(CN)1

aligning them to the identified binding hotspots. Rodrigues’
rotation formula is employed to align the principal axis of a
fragment vector ⃗vfrag with the corresponding target hotspot
vector ⃗vtarget:

R = I + (sin θ) K + (1 − cos θ) K 2

(3)

Where K is the cross-product matrix of the unit vectors. This
matrix ensures that fragments are correctly oriented toward the
interaction sites before linkage. For each placed fragment, the
following computations were performed: its 3D center of mass,
its principal axis (defined as the farthest-atom vector), and the
target direction derived from the hotspot point.

Genetic Operators Offspring ligands are generated through

probabilistic application of three operators:

1) Crossover (Recombination): Two parent molecules are

combined using either:

• Reaction Linking: Application of SMARTS-based
reaction templates to ensure synthetic feasibility.
• BRICS Crossover: Decomposition of parents into
BRICS (Biosynthetic Responsible Interaction of
Chemical Scaffolds) fragments, followed by shuf-
fling and re-merging.

2) Mutation:

• Fragment Injection: Addition of a new fragment

from the library linked via reaction rules.

• Conformer Relaxation: Stochastic UFF energy

minimization to relieve internal strain.

• Scaffold Hopping: Replacement of a structural

subunit with a bioisostere from the library.

3) Safety Filters: All operations utilize a safe merge
protocol, which validates valence constraints and atomic
connectivity before accepting a new structure.

To ensure the generation of high-quality drug candidates,
employed a composite fitness function F(m) that balances
physicochemical properties, geometric fit, novelty, and con-
formational energy.

F (m) = wp·Sproxy+wf ·Sf it+wn·Snovelty+ws·Sstrain−λ·PSA

(4)
Where the weights were empirically set to: wp = 0.45, wf =
0.35, wn = 0.15, and ws = 0.2

Proxy Score Sproxy: A weighted average of QED (Quantita-
tive Estimate of Drug-likeness), LogP (Lipophilicity), Molec-
ular Weight normalization, and Rotatable Bonds.

Pocket Fit Sf it is calculated using:

TABLE VI
A DETAILED PSEUDO-CODE REPRESENTING THE LOGIC OF THE LIGAND
GENERATION METATHEORETIC FRAMEWORK IMPLEMENTATION

Ligand Generation Algorithm

Input:

– AML transcriptome signatures T
– Target binding pocket PDB file P
– Fragment library F
– Reference molecules R (for novelty penalization)
– Hyperparameters (generations G, candidates per generation K)

1. Pcoords, Pcenter ← load pocket coords(P )
2. Hotspots ← kmeans hotspots(Pcoords, n = 4)
3. Lib ← build fragment mols(F )
4. RefFPs ← MorganFingerprints(R)
5. Initialize empty population M0
6. for each fragment f ∈ Lib do

7. Embed and store f into M0 if chemically valid

8. for generation g = 1 . . . G do

9. Initialize candidate set Cg = ∅
10. for iteration k = 1 . . . K do

Sf it = 0.6 · Finside + 0.4 ·

1 −

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

dhot
dhot + 4.0

(5)

Where Finside the fraction of heavy atoms within the pocket
radius, and bardhot is the mean distance to the nearest hotspot.
• Novelty Snovelty: Calculated as 1 − max (Tc) where Tc
Tanimoto similarity to known reference ligands using
Morgan Fingerprints of 2048 bits.

• Strain Energy Sstrain: A penalty derived from the per-
atom UFF energy after constrained embedding, ensuring
molecules do not adopt high-energy, unrealistic confor-
mations; scaled 0–1.

• SA Penalty PSA: A synthetic accessibility penalty de-

rived from fragment complexity and ring topology.

The generative process operates through evolutionary itera-
tions. In each generation, numerous fragment combinations are
sampled, spatially guided, chemically merged, and evaluated.
Only the highest-fitness molecules are retained for subsequent
generations, enabling progressive refinement toward ligands
with strong drug-likeness, AML relevance, optimal pocket
compatibility, and stable 3D conformations. After the prede-
fined number of generations, top-scoring candidates from all
cycles are aggregated and reported as the final set of de novo
AML-conditioned ligands.

4.7 ADMET-Guided and SwissDock Validation for the
Generated Ligands

All successfully assembled ligands were evaluated using
a multi-objective fitness function integrating drug-likeness,
structural novelty, hotspot alignment, pocket compatibility,
and conformational stability. Only the top-K candidates were
retained in each generation, enabling evolutionary refinement
over G generations. Following convergence,
the resulting
ligands underwent
independent pharmacokinetic validation.
Their SMILES representations were uploaded to ADMET-
lab 3.0 [28] for comprehensive assessment of absorption,
distribution, metabolism, excretion,
toxicity, and synthetic
feasibility. Candidates were filtered according to Lipinski’s

11. Fragment selection
12. f1 ← random fragment from Lib
13. f2 ← random fragment from Lib
14. Hotspot-guided placement
15. h ← random hotspot from Hotspots
16. f ′
17. f ′
18. Reaction-first linking
19. mol ← try reaction linking(f ′
20.

1 ← align fragment to vector(f1, h)
2 ← align fragment to vector(f2, h)

if mol = None then

1, f ′
2)

1, f ′
2)

21. mol ← brics safe merge(f ′
if mol = None then continue

22.
23. mol ← safe sanitize(mol)
if mol is invalid: continue
24.
25. Multi-objective fitness evaluation
26. props ← compute properties rdkit(mol)
27. Sdrug ← proxy score(props)
28. Snov ← novelty score(mol, RefFPs)
29. Strain ← conformer strain penalty(mol)
30. Sfit ← pocket fit score(mol, Pcenter, r, Hotspots)
31. Fitness = w1Sdrug + w2Snov + w3Sfit − w4Strain
32. Add (mol, Fitness) to Cg

33. Mg ← top-K molecules from Cg ranked by Fitness

34. Return best molecules across all generations (cid:83)

g Mg as final set M ∗

Output: Optimized AML-specific candidate ligands M ∗

Rule of Five, the Pfizer Rule, and the GSK Rule, eliminat-
ing compounds with unfavorable physicochemical properties,
predicted toxicity risks, or poor drug-likeness. This screening
step yielded a high-confidence set of pharmacologically viable
and synthetically realistic ligands. Binding affinity and struc-
tural plausibility were subsequently evaluated via molecular
docking using SwissDock [29], a web-based platform powered
by the EADock DSS engine. Top-ranked ligands from the
generative and ADMET filtering stages were converted to
standardized 3D formats, energy-minimized, and manually
submitted alongside the prepared target protein structure, from
which crystallographic ligands, ions, and water molecules had
been removed. Docking was performed in Accurate mode,
which explores extensive ligand conformational space and
protein interaction poses through a hybrid evolutionary and
energy-based search. For each ligand–protein pair, SwissDock
generated multiple binding clusters ranked by the FullFitness

Fig. 18. Schematic representation of the evolutionary algorithm for de novo
ligand generation

Fig. 19. Optimization dynamics and population evolution. (A) Pareto opti-
mization analysis plotting Pocket Fit Score against the Proxy Score (Drug-
likeness), with a polynomial trendline indicating the optimal trade-off frontier.
(B) Population Chemical Diversity Dynamics across 18 generations, measured
by average intra-generation similarity. (C) Evolutionary convergence of the
Best Proxy Score over the generation span, illustrating the metaheuristic
search trajectory.

score, integrating van der Waals interactions, electrostatics,
desolvation effects, and internal ligand strain.

5 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The results are organized to (4.1) quantify the generative
performance of the framework, (4.2) characterize the chemical
and physicochemical properties of the resulting ligands, and
(4.3) evaluate their structural alignment and binding plausibil-
ity within AML-relevant target pockets. Emphasis is placed
on interpreting how the design choices fragment biasing,
reaction-first assembly, hotspot-guided placement, and multi-
objective fitness optimization collectively shaped the final
ligand population.

5.1 Generative Performance of the Model

After a multiple runnings of the model for a population of
40, generation of 20, and hotspot clusters of 4; the generative
performance of the metaheuristic assembly was evaluated
by analyzing the evolutionary trajectory and the trade-offs
between competing objectives.

Fig. 20. Assessment of de novo generation capabilities. (A) Scatter plot of
Novelty versus Fitness, colored by SA Score, highlighting the generation of
unique chemical entities. (B) Kernel density estimation distributions for QED
and SA Scores, representing the physicochemical profile of the generated
library.

The relationship between chemical quality and target bind-
ing was analyzed using Pareto optimization (Fig. 19A). A non-
linear inverted U-shaped relationship was observed between
the Proxy Score (drug-likeness) and the Pocket Fit Score,
increases in drug-likeness initially improve
indicating that
pocket accommodation until a saturation point around a Proxy
Score of 0.70, beyond which structural constraints limit further
gains in binding affinity. Generative stability was evaluated
through population dynamics. As shown in Fig. 19B, intra-
generation similarity exhibited oscillatory behavior rather than
a monotonic increase, suggesting that the metaheuristic as-
sembly algorithm effectively preserved chemical diversity and
avoided premature convergence. Concurrently, convergence of
the Proxy Score (Fig. 19C) demonstrated consistent identifica-
tion of high-performing candidates, with top scores stabilizing
in later generations, confirming effective multi-objective opti-
mization.

To validate the de novo nature of the generated compounds,
Novelty scores were plotted against Fitness as shown at figure
20A. The data points clustered strictly around a novelty score
of 1.0, confirming that the generated molecules are structurally
distinct from the training dataset. The color gradient indicates
that high fitness scores were achievable across a range of
SA scores, suggesting that high novelty does not necessarily
compromise synthetic feasibility. The physicochemical prop-
erties of the generated population were further characterized
through density distributions as shown at figure 20B. The
QED distribution exhibited a sharp peak between 0.5 and
0.7,
indicating a strong bias towards drug-like regions of
chemical space. Conversely, the SA Score distribution was
broader, with a significant density in the lower range 1.5–2.5,
implying that a substantial portion of the generated candidates
possess molecular complexities amenable to standard synthesis
pathways.

The structural diversity of the generated compounds was
visualized using PCA as shown at figure 21A. The scatter plot
reveals a dispersed distribution across the first two principal
components, indicating that the model explored a broad area
of chemical space rather than clustering in a narrow structural
motif. The overlay of Fitness Scores shows that high-fitness
candidates are not confined to a single cluster but are dis-

Fig. 21. Principal Component Analysis of chemical space and binding affinity
profiling. (A) Two-dimensional PCA of the generated chemical space, colored
by Fitness Score, visualizing the structural diversity and property clustering.
(B) Histogram and density currve of the Pocket Fit Scores, detailing the
frequency distribution of ligand-target shape complementarity.

Fig. 22. Manifold learning visualization via UMAP. (A) UMAP of the
chemical space with density contours, colored by QED Score. (B) A detailed
view of the UMAP projection highlighting local clustering and QED variations
among specific high-value candidates

tributed across different regions of the manifold, suggesting
multiple distinct structural classes are capable of satisfying the
multi-objective fitness function. Additionally, the distribution
of binding affinities was quantified via Pocket Fit Scores as
shown at figure 21B. The data followed an approximately
normal distribution centered around 0.710. The narrow range
of the distribution 0.707 to 0.713 highlights the specificity
of the target-driven filtering process, ensuring that the final
selection of candidates consistently meets a high threshold for
geometric complementarity with the AML-associated target
pocket.

To capture non-linear structural

relationships, Uniform
Manifold Approximation and Projection was employed as
shown at figure 22A. The resulting projection displays a
central density of generated compounds, delineated by contour
lines, which corresponds to the primary structural domain
explored by the model. The color mapping reveals a gradient
of QED scores, identifying specific sub-clusters within the
latent space that correspond to higher drug-likeness. The de-
tailed scatter plot of figure 22b further resolves these clusters,
showing that compounds with similar QED profiles tend to
group together. This clustering confirms that the generative
model learns a structured latent representation where physico-
chemical properties change smoothly across the manifold. The
presence of high-QED points with values yellow/light green at
the periphery of the main clusters suggests that the most drug-
like candidates often reside at the boundaries of the explored
chemical space, potentially representing optimized deviations

Fig. 23. Top 10 generated ligands and their physicochemical characterization

from the mean structural scaffolds.

5.2 Overview and Physicochemical Characterization of the
Generated Ligands

The generative model yielded a set of novel compounds, ten
of which were selected as top candidates based on the priori-
tization criteria of high Pocket Fit Score, optimal Proxy Score
(drug-likeness), and low SA Score. The top ten ligands ranges
from L1 to L10 are structurally diverse and exhibit favorable
physicochemical properties, as detailed in figure 23. Chemical
structures of the ten prioritized ligands (L1–L10) generated
de novo, alongside their respective simplified molecular-input
line-entry system (SMILES) strings, Pocket Fit Score, SA
Score, Quantitative Estimate of Drug-likeness (QED), and
calculated log partition coefficient (LogP). The 3D view (top)
illustrates the predicted binding conformation within the target
pocket, and the 2D view (bottom) shows the corresponding
chemical structure.

5.2.1 Structural and Physicochemical Analysis: The se-
lected ligands demonstrated an impressive balance between
high binding affinity and desirable pharmaceutical attributes,
supporting the efficacy of the multi-objective optimization
process.

• Pocket Fit Score: TAll ten prioritized ligands achieved
high Pocket Fit Scores, ranging from 0.706 to 0.725.
Ligand L4 exhibited the highest score of 0.725, while
L1 and L7 also demonstrated strong predicted binding
with scores of 0.706 and 0.711, respectively.

• Drug-likeness (QED and Proxy Score): The Quantita-
tive Estimate of Drug-likeness (QED) scores for the top
candidates spanned from 0.48 to 0.62. Ligand L8 and
L9 showed the highest QED values of 0.62 and 0.61,
respectively, indicating a favorable balance of desirable
physicochemical properties for drug development.

• Synthetic Feasibility (SA Score): The synthetic acces-
sibility of the ligands was assessed using the SA Score,
where lower values indicate easier synthesis. The scores
were excellent, ranging from 0.83 to 2.01. Ligand L5
achieved the lowest SA Score of 0.83, classifying it as
very easy to synthesize.

• Lipophilicity (LogP): The calculated partition coeffi-
cient (LogP) for the ligands varied from 0.56 to 2.99,
placing them well within the range considered suitable
for oral bioavailability and membrane permeability.

Fig. 24. Distribution of Key Physicochemical Properties

5.2.2 Structural Diversity: The set of top ligands rep-
resents diverse chemical scaffolds, supporting the claim of
successful exploration of the chemical space.

• Pocket Fit Score: TAll ten prioritized ligands achieved
high Pocket Fit Scores, ranging from 0.706 to 0.725.
Ligand L4 exhibited the highest score of 0.725, while
L1 and L7 also demonstrated strong predicted binding
with scores of 0.706 and 0.711, respectively.

• Aromatics and Small Molecules: Ligands L4 and L6 are
relatively small, simple halogenated aromatic compounds,
while L9 is a simple N-methylbenzamide.

• Heterocycles: Structures L1 and L7 contain pyrimidine-
aniline scaffolds, known for their privileged structures in
kinase inhibition

• Aliphatic Structures:

Ligands such as L5 and L8
incorporate saturated rings and flexible aliphatic chains,
respectively, contributing to the overall structural breadth
of the generated library.

5.2.3 Analysis of The ADMET profiling: The computa-
tional predictions from ADMET Lab 3.0 provide an initial,
high-throughput screen for potential liabilities and favorable
pharmacokinetic properties.

Histograms at figure 24; showing the distribution of the
MWs, the octanol-water Partition Coefficient log P and TPSA
for the compound set. Vertical lines denote established thresh-
olds for favorable oral bioavailability. The distribution of MW
shows where most compounds lie relative to the Lipinski Rule
of Five (Ro5) limit of 500 Da. Compounds with MW greater
than 500 Da may face challenges with passive permeability
and oral absorption. The plot assesses the lipophilicity of the
set. Compounds are ideally balanced, with log P typically
between 1 and 5. Highly lipophilic compounds log(p) ¿ 5 often
lead to poor solubility and non-specific binding, while highly
polar ones log P ¡ 0 struggle with membrane permeability.
The histogram indicates the central tendency and spreads of
lipophilicity. Finally, the TPSA relates to the size and polarity
of a molecule, directly impacting passive transport. Most
compounds should fall below the oral limit 140 ˚A
. For CNS-
2
targeting drugs, an even stricter limit is often applied < 90 ˚A
.
The distribution here reveals how many candidates meet the
criteria for general vs. CNS penetration.

2

At figure 25; Bar chart showing the number of molecules
out of N=10 predicted to be inhibitors probability > 0.5 of
the three most clinically relevant cytochrome P450 (CYP)
isoforms. Drug-Drug Interaction (DDI) Risk: Inhibition of
CYP enzymes, particularly the highly prevalent CYP3A4, is

Fig. 25. Predicted Major CYP Inhibition Risk (Prob. ¿ 0.5)

TABLE VII
EVALUATION OF LIGAND CANDIDATES FOR DRUG-LIKENESS AND
TOXICITY LIABILITIES

D
g
o
l

2.59
1.72
1.23
3.17
0.87
2.30
1.30

L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
L6
L7

L8
L9
L10

1.20
0.93
1.75

A
B
H

D
B
H

t
o
R

p
i
L

3
3
3
0
2
0
4

1
2
1

1
1
3
0
2
0
3

2
1
0

2
3
5
0
1
0
2

2
2
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0

S
N
A
P

I

–
–
–
–
–
–
[(1,
0, 2,
3, 4,
5,
12,
13)]
–
–
–

r
e
z
fi
P

K
S
G

0
0
0
1
0
0
0

0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0

e
l
g
n
a
i
r
T

n
e
d
l
o
G

0
1
0
1
1
1
1

1
1
1

G
R
E
h

0.56
0.09
0.28
0.23
0.13
0.16
0.28

I
L
I
D

0.98
0.64
0.40
0.65
0.25
0.38
0.93

s
e
m
A

0.67
0.29
0.75
0.23
0.33
0.73
0.87

0.49
0.13
0.42

0.02
0.73
0.41

0.34
0.49
0.35

0
5
D
L

–
–
–
–
–
–
–

–
–
–

a major cause of clinical failure due to DDI risk. While in
the Lead Prioritization; Candidates showing high inhibition
counts for any major isoform, especially CYP3A4, should be
flagged as high-risk and are generally de-prioritized or require
significant structural modification to remove the metabolic
liability. Compounds with zero predicted inhibition across all
isoforms are preferred for minimizing DDI risk.

The overall in silico ADMET and physicochemical profiling
of the ligand candidates revealed an exceptionally promising
drug-like profile. All compounds in the set successfully ad-
here to major drug-likeness criteria, recording zero violations
across the Lipinski, Pfizer, GSK, and Golden Triangle rules,
suggesting strong prospects for good oral bioavailability and
membrane permeability. Physicochemically, the set’s distribu-
tion across MW, log(P), and TPSA confirms that the molecules
reside within the favorable chemical space for oral drug
candidates. Furthermore, the library exhibits minimal predicted
liabilities concerning xenobiotic metabolism, with zero pre-
dicted inhibition probability ¿ 0.5 reported for the three major

Cytochrome P450 isoforms CYP1A2, CYP2C9, and CYP3A4,
which significantly minimizes the risk of adverse DDIs. The
property map provides a clear visualization of the compounds’
log (P) versus TPSA space, which, when coupled with the
predicted Blood-Brain Barrier (BBB) scores, enables efficient
prioritization of leads for either CNS or non-CNS indications.
Collectively, these results indicate that the ligand set possesses
excellent pharmacokinetic and safety attributes, positioning
them as high-quality starting points for further development.

5.3 Structural Validation of Ligand L1 Binding Mode
within the Active Site of Biomarker Protein A08A96

The molecular docking study was performed to structurally
validate the predicted binding affinity and inhibitory mode
of the lead ligand L1, against the three active sites of the
biomarker protein A08A96. This analysis provides mechanis-
tic insights into the L1 A08A96 interaction and confirms the
optimal spatial orientation of the ligand for pharmacologic
activity.

5.3.1 Docking Methodology: Molecular docking was con-
ducted using two independent platforms:
the widely-used
SwissDock server and the internal CB.DOCK2 [30] ; both
are using AutoDock Vina docking environment,
to ensure
the robustness and convergence of the predicted binding pose
as well as auto blind docking. The active site was defined
based on conserved catalytic residues identified from sequence
homology and crystallographic data and predicted based on the
top consensus binding pocket. For both methods, the lowest-
energy binding mode was selected for detailed structural anal-
ysis. To ensure a comprehensive search of the conformational
space and to avoid entrapment in local energy minima, a
high sampling exhaustivity of 35 was applied. This rigorous
sampling protocol allowed for an intensive exploration of
the ligand’s degrees of freedom within the protein’s binding
architecture, ensuring that the identified global minimum is
robust and reproducible.

The protein is displayed in a gray solvent-accessible surface
or ribbon view, highlighting the deep embedding of the ligand
within the catalytic cleft. This orientation corresponds to
Model 1, representing the global minimum energy. Moreover,
figure 26 demonstrates the high degree of geometric comple-
mentarity between the ligand scaffold and the protein’s interior
contours. The distribution of polar and non-polar regions
suggests an optimized fit that accounts for the stable binding
energies observed across the top-ranked docking clusters.

Docking Results and Thermodynamic Stability
The docking simulations successfully identified several
high-affinity clusters. The use of blind docking via CB-
DOCK2 allowed for the identification of the most probable
binding cavities, while SwissDock provided detailed energetic
scoring for the ligand poses. The top-ranked models, their
calculated affinities, and the specific grid sizes ;docking di-
mensions are summarized below:

The calculated binding free energy ∆ G for the top-ranked
pose is -6.571 kcal/mol by SwissDock and -6.800 kcal/mol
using CB-Dock2. The energy magnitude has a values in the

Fig. 26. Three-dimensional representation of the docking pose of Ligand L1
within the three actives site of biomarker protein A08A96

TABLE VIII
EVALUATION OF LIGAND CANDIDATES FOR DRUG-LIKENESS AND
TOXICITY LIABILITIES

Model No.

SwissDock

CB.DOCK2

Docking (x, y, z)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

-6.571
-6.473
-6.361
-6.289
-6.287
-6.241
-6.189
-6.162
-6.150
-6.148

-6.800
-6.300
-5.930
-5.900
-5.600
-
-
-
-
-

33, 35, 35
19, 25, 19
19, 19, 19
19, 19, 19
19, 19, 19
31, 18, 20
30, 16, 20
27, 19, 22
27, 19, 22
25, 13, 13

range of -6.0 to -7.0 kcal/mol are indicative of spontaneous
binding with moderate-to-high affinity, typically corresponding
to an inhibition constant of Ki in the low micromolar range.
Moreover, the boltzmann distribution with the narrow energy
gap between Model 1 and Model 10 a difference of only
0.4kcal/mol suggests a ”flat” energy landscape where the
ligand can adopt several slightly different but closely related
orientations, all of which are energetically favourable. The
docking results provide strong computational evidence that
Ligand L1 is a viable candidate for the A08A96 biomarker
which is one of the candidates; and emphasizing on the
metaheuristic model to generate highly promising ligands. The
consensus in binding energy, the high sampling exhaustivity,
and the favorable thermodynamic scores confirm that L1 pos-
sesses the structural requirements to form a stable inhibitory

complex with the target protein.

6 CONCLUSION

This study is an integrated, transcriptome-conditioned com-
putational framework was developed and validated for person-
alized de novo drug discovery in AML. By coupling patient-
specific transcriptomic WGCA analysis with network-driven
biomarker prioritization, structural pocket profiling, and meta-
heuristic ligand generation, a coherent end-to-end pipeline was
established to address the molecular heterogeneity that charac-
terizes AML and limits the efficacy of conventional therapeutic
strategies. The proposed framework systematically bridged the
gap between target identification and ligand design through the
explicit incorporation of structural and physicochemical con-
straints. Druggable pockets were quantitatively characterized
using DOGSiteScorer, enabling rational prioritization of top
20 candidates such as SLC7A7 and HK3 prior to molecular
generation. Subsequently, a novel fragment-based, reaction-
first evolutionary algorithm was employed to assemble novel
ligands, guided by hotspot-aware spatial alignment and a
multi-objective fitness function. The success of this approach
was evidenced by the generation of compounds exhibiting a
favorable balance between pocket complementarity and drug-
likeness, with QED scores distributed primarily between 0.5
and 0.7. Furthermore, the efficacy of the metaheuristic search
was confirmed through the identification of Ligand L1, which
demonstrated a binding free energy of -6.571 kcal/mol and
a high Pocket Fit score of 0.725. The significance of this
work lies in its unified integration of transcriptomics, systems
biology, and structure-based design into a scalable workflow.
Rather than relying on population-level assumptions, molecu-
lar generation was explicitly conditioned on biologically rele-
vant targets identified through the analysis of the S100 Alarmin
family and other key biomarkers. While the present study was
limited to in silico validation and bulk transcriptomic data, the
robust binding conformations and favorable ADMET profiles
observed suggest a practical blueprint for precision oncology.
It is concluded that this framework and the novel hybrid ligand
generator provides a generalizable strategy for personalized
drug discovery, offering a promising avenue for the treatment
of AML and other heterogeneous malignancies.

7 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE STUDIES

7.1 Limitations

7.1.1 Computational-Only Validation: Without experi-
mental
testing, critical biological aspects such as cellular
uptake, metabolic stability, toxicity, immunogenicity, and off-
target effects remain unknown. Molecular docking and AD-
MET predictions provide useful early insights, but their re-
liance on simplified force fields, static protein models, and
approximations of solvation and dynamics may lead to false
positives or overestimated binding affinities. Additionally, de-
pendence on AlphaFold3-predicted structures introduces un-
certainty, as even high-confidence models may deviate from
native conformations, particularly in flexible regions crucial
for ligand binding.

7.1.2 Reliance on Bulk RNA-Seq Data: Another limita-
tion stems from using bulk RNA-seq data from the TCGA-
LAML cohort. Bulk transcriptomics averages signals across
heterogeneous cell populations, potentially masking the molec-
ular profiles of rare leukemic stem cells and therapy-resistant
subclones that drive relapses. As a result, target selection may
be biased toward dominant clones while overlooking clinically
relevant vulnerabilities in minor subpopulations.

7.2 Future Studies

7.2.1 Experimental Validation and Iterative Optimiza-
tion: Future work will prioritize experimental validation and
iterative optimization of top-ranked ligands. Selected can-
didates will be synthesized and tested in vitro for bind-
ing and potency, followed by in vivo evaluation in patient-
derived xenograft models to assess efficacy, pharmacokinetics,
pharmacodynamics, and preliminary toxicity. These results
will feed into a closed-loop Design-Make-Test-Analyze cycle,
enabling continuous refinement of the computational model
and medicinal chemistry optimization.

7.2.2

Integration of Single-Cell and Spatial Multi-
Omics: To address tumor heterogeneity, future iterations will
integrate single-cell RNA sequencing and spatial transcrip-
tomic data. This will allow identification of molecular vul-
nerabilities in leukemic stem cells and resistant subclones,
support subclone-specific targeting and guide the design of
combination or multi-target therapies. Incorporating profiles
from non-malignant bone marrow cells, such as immune
and stromal populations, will enable microenvironment-aware
drug design by highlighting targets involved in pro-leukemic
interactions and immunomodulatory pathways.

allows

design

7.2.3 Model Expansion

and Generalization: The
pipeline’s modular,
its
disease-agnostic
extension beyond AML to other hematologic malignancies,
solid tumors with high heterogeneity, and diseases with limited
Integrating additional data modalities,
treatment options.
including proteomics, epigenomics, and metabolomics, will
provide a more comprehensive representation of disease
biology and reveal previously inaccessible druggable targets.
Collectively, these features position the pipeline as a flexible,
generalizable computational platform for precision drug
discovery across oncology and other therapeutic areas with
unmet clinical needs.

8 COMPETING INTERESTS

All authors declare no financial or non-financial competing

interests.

9 DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

The TCGA acute myeloid leukemia

exon
expression by RNAseq (polyA+ IlluminaHiSeq) dataset
used in this paper
at:
https://shorturl.at/MnAFM

is publicly available online

(LAML)

[21] H. St¨ark et al., “EquiBIND: Geometric Deep Learning for Drug Bind-
ing Structure Prediction,” arXiv:2202.05146, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.05146

[22] J. Lamb et al., “The Connectivity Map: Using gene-expression signa-
tures to connect small molecules, genes, and disease,” Science, vol. 313,
no. 5795, pp. 1929–1935, Sep. 2006, doi: 10.1126/science.1132939.

[23] “UCSC Xena.” [Online]. Available: https://xenabrowser.net/datapages/
[24] “HiSeq 2000 Support,” Illumina. [Online]. Available: https://support.
illumina.com/sequencing/sequencing instruments/hiseq 2000.html
[25] J. Abramson et al., “Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular
interactions with AlphaFold 3,” Nature, vol. 630, no. 8016, pp. 493–
500, May 2024, doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-07487-w.

[26] “ProteinsPlus Server – DOGSite.” [Online]. Available: https://proteins.

plus/help/dogsite

[27] L. Fu et al., “ADMETlab 3.0: An updated comprehensive online
ADMET prediction platform,” Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 52, no. W1,
pp. W422–W431, Apr. 2024, doi: 10.1093/nar/gkae236.

[28] M. Bugnon et al., “SwissDock 2024: Major enhancements for small-
molecule docking,” Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 52, no. W1, pp. W324–
W332, Jul. 2024, doi: 10.1093/nar/gkae300.

[29] J. Eberhardt et al., “AutoDock Vina 1.2.0,” Journal of Chemical Infor-
mation and Modeling, vol. 61, no. 8, pp. 3891–3898, Jul. 2021, doi:
10.1021/acs.jcim.1c00203.

[30] Y. Liu et al., “CB-Dock2: Improved protein–ligand blind docking,”
Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 50, no. W1, pp. W159–W164, May 2022,
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkac394.

10 CODE AVAILABILITY

The underlying code for this study [and training/validation
datasets] is not publicly available but may be made available
to qualified researchers on reasonable request from the corre-
sponding author.

REFERENCES

[1] National Library of Medicine, “Acute myeloid leukemia,” MedlinePlus.
[Online]. Available: https://medlineplus.gov/acutemyeloidleukemia.html
[2] N. M. N. P. Bcop Bcps and A. P. M. Pa-C, “Acute Myeloid Leukemia:
An Ever-Changing Disease,” Journal of the Advanced Practitioner in
Oncology, vol. 10, no. 8, Dec. 2019, doi: 10.6004/jadpro.2019.10.8.12.
[3] M. Morcos-Sandino, S. I. Quezada-Ram´ırez, and A. G´omez-De Le´on,
“Advances in the Treatment of Acute Myeloid Leukemia: Implications
for Low- and Middle-Income Countries,” Biomedicines, vol. 13, no. 5,
p. 1221, 2025, doi: 10.3390/biomedicines13051221.

[4] “Acute myeloid leukemia – Cancer Stat Facts,” SEER. [Online]. Avail-

able: https://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/amyl.html

[5] “What role is precision medicine playing in transforming cancer treat-
ment – and how are developers adapting?,” Pharma’s Almanac. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.pharmasalmanac.com/articles/what-role-is-
precision-medicine-playing-in-transforming-cancer-
treatment-and-how-are-developers-adapting

[6] S. C.-h. Pegg, J. J. Haresco, and I. D. Kuntz, “A genetic algo-
rithm for structure-based de novo design,” Journal of Computer-Aided
Molecular Design, vol. 15, no. 10, pp. 911–933, Oct. 2001, doi:
10.1023/A:1014389729000.

[7] R. Vasundhara Devi, S. Siva Sathya, and M. S. Coumar, “Evolutionary
algorithms for de novo drug design – A survey,” Applied Soft Computing,
vol. 27, pp. 543–552, 2015, doi: 10.1016/j.asoc.2014.09.042.

[8] X. Wang, K. Song, L. Li, and L. Chen, “Structure-Based Drug
in Medici-
Design Strategies
nal Chemistry, vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 998–1006, Aug. 2018, doi:
10.2174/1568026618666180813152921.

and Challenges,” Current Topics

[9] S. M. Ajjarapu et al., “Ligand-based drug designing,” in Bioinformatics,
D. B. Singh and R. K. Pathak, Eds. Cambridge, MA, USA: Academic
Press, 2022, ch. 15, pp. 233–252, doi: 10.1016/B978-0-323-89775-
4.00018-3.

[10] K. H. Metzeler et al., “Spectrum and prognostic relevance of driver gene
mutations in acute myeloid leukemia,” Blood, 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2016-01-693879

[11] B. Samra et al., “Venetoclax-Based Combinations in Acute Myeloid
Leukemia: Current Evidence and Future Directions,” Frontiers in On-
cology, vol. 10, p. 562558, Nov. 2020, doi: 10.3389/fonc.2020.562558.
[12] A. Subramanian et al., “A next generation connectivity map: L1000
platform and the first 1,000,000 profiles,” Cell, vol. 171, no. 6, pp.
1437–1452.e17, Nov. 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2017.10.049.

[13] Z. Wang et al., “Extraction and analysis of signatures from the Gene
Expression Omnibus by the crowd,” Nature Communications, vol. 7, p.
12846, Sep. 2016, doi: 10.1038/ncomms12846.

[14] “A comprehensive clinically informed map of dependencies in cancer
cells and framework for target prioritization,” Cancer Cell, pp. 301–316,
2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccell.2023.12.016

[15] R. G´omez-Bombarelli et al., “Automatic chemical design using a data-
driven continuous representation of molecules,” ACS Central Science,
vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 268–276, Jan. 2018, doi: 10.1021/acscentsci.7b00572.
[16] D. C. Nicola and T. Kipf, “MolGAN: An implicit generative model for
small molecular graphs,” arXiv:1805.11973, 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.11973

[17] D. A. Erlanson, “Introduction to Fragment-Based Drug Discovery,”
Topics in Current Chemistry, vol. 317, pp. 1–32, Jan. 2011, doi:
10.1007/128 2011 180.

[18] J. H.

Jensen, “A graph-based genetic algorithm and generative
model/Monte Carlo tree search for the exploration of chemical space,”
Chemical Science, vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 3567–3572, Jan. 2019, doi:
10.1039/C8SC05372C.

[19] Y. Kwon and J. Lee, “MolFinder: An evolutionary algorithm for the
global optimization of molecular properties,” Journal of Cheminformat-
ics, vol. 13, p. 24, Mar. 2021, doi: 10.1186/s13321-021-00501-7.
[20] O. Trott and A. J. Olson, “AutoDock Vina: Improving the speed and
accuracy of docking,” Journal of Computational Chemistry, vol. 31, no.
2, pp. 455–461, Jun. 2009, doi: 10.1002/jcc.21334.

